---
title: Uru&colon; Ages Beyond Myst
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/agesbeyondmyst/
layout: myst
---

![Relto, the home base in Uru](/assets/images/myst/08-uru1.jpg)

Imagine reading a press release that describes a website filled with
interactive poems. The site will debut with just a few poems, gradually
adding more in response to user involvement, making the site’s visitors
part of a living, breathing artwork. It’s a clever idea, and a couple
poems released as teasers show that the site has a lot of promise.
Sadly, however, when the site finally debuts, something has gone wrong
in development. Instead of the vibrant scene you were promised, there’s
just a static page with a handful of poems. There’s not even anywhere to
post a comment. The poems are still well-written, and you enjoy reading
them, but you can’t shake the feeling that you could have been a part of
something much bigger. Welcome to the beautiful and depressing world of
*Uru*.

After completing *Riven*, Cyan went quiet and began work on a
multiplayer Myst game which was codenamed “Mudpie.” The concept was a
surprising one, *Myst* being perhaps the quintessential single-player
experience. Fans were largely intrigued but somewhat apprehensive. The
development process was long and Cyan’s occasional preview screenshots
offered glimpses into a game that seemed perennially just out-of-reach.
Even more tantalizing were the promises of real-time graphics, ongoing
storylines, and (perhaps most intriguing of all) access to D’ni itself.
We waited patiently, forgiving Cyan’s radio silence on the grounds that
Mudpie was going to be awesome.

Yet even early on there were signs of trouble. Cyan’s publisher,
Ubisoft, requested that a single-player version be built as well; dialup
users were still a majority at the time and Ubisoft didn’t want a
product that required broadband. Cyan obliged, and the first public
release of the game was the single-player adaptation *Uru: Ages Beyond
Myst* in 2003. The multiplayer version, *Uru Live*, was not ready. The
game shipped with promises of online play, but implementation was
delayed. Eventually, the pretense was dropped, and in February of 2004
*Uru Live* was officially canceled.

Online play did eventually materialize in a handful of incarnations, but
never in the form originally intended. The vast majority of players have
never experienced any online play at all, and know *Uru* only from its
offline skeleton, a vast yet incomplete universe which always opens to a
view of the player’s mostly-empty bookshelf.

*Uru: Ages Beyond Myst* and its expansion packs *To D’ni* and *The Path
of the Shell* have become the *Uru* canon, and none of them is a
“complete” game per se. To paraphrase Atrus: it’s important to consider
what the creators hoped to achieve, compared to what the game truly is.

*Uru* is in many ways something of an oddity in the series overall, even
without the multiplayer component. We leave behind not only Atrus and
his family, but their entire time period: it is now the present day, the
player character is “you,” and the setting is present-day New Mexico.
*Myst*’s creators and fans had long enjoyed blurring the line between
fantasy and reality, but the games themselves didn’t partake in this
prior to *Uru*, which presents itself as “real” with gleeful enthusiasm.
The game environment is filled with real-world clutter imported by the
explorers from Earth: styrofoam, t-shirts, composition notebooks, and
the infamous orange construction cones. It even goes so far as to
include a number of real people as in-game characters, such as longtime
D’ni canon-keeper Richard “RAWA” Watson and *Myst* creators Rand and
Robyn Miller. The conceit is that the digital environment is a
recreation of something which is literally real. It’s an interesting
concept, especially in the context of the intended multiplayer
experience, and one which (to my knowledge) has never been attempted
anywhere else.

*Uru* is also distanced from the other games by its realtime graphics
and freedom of movement, aspects which it utilizes in many different
puzzles, to varying degrees of success. Movement as a puzzle mechanic is
of course common in video games, but it was new for *Myst*. The player
character’s physicality often becomes a critical part of a puzzle,
though the concept of lowering a bridge by kicking it is one that proved
unintuitive to longtime *Myst* players. Unfortunately, player
physicality also gave rise to the dreaded “kicking puzzles.” These
involve shoving objects around by bumping into them, a frustrating
process which greatly hampers suspension of disbelief. Overall, *Uru’*s
puzzles tend to convey a sense that the creators were still trying to
get a handle on what to do, and what not to do, with the freedom of
movement.

*Uru*’s most regrettable departure from the *Myst* formula, however, is
its neglect of story. *Uru*, while still including the usual invasions
of privacy (diaries, hidden drawers, etc.), doesn’t really have much in
the way of characters or plot. This is in part another symptom of
*Uru*’s stillborn debut, as the story was supposed to evolve online in
real time, but regardless of the reason, the absence of narrative is
pronounced. While it tries to be as accessible as possible, *Uru*
remains a somewhat forbidding game, often coming across more like an
austere experiment than an enjoyable adventure.

*Uru* was frequently advertised as a game in which “you play as
yourself,” an innovation which the creators found so appealing that it
was incorporated into the game’s very title: you-are-you. This concept,
though treated as novel, was in fact central to the original *Myst* as
well. “You have stumbled across a most intriguing book,” the game’s
manual says, conveying with a single pronoun that the player and player
character are one and the same.

Another similarity between *Uru* and *Myst* was its promotion as an
escape from reality. Magazine advertisements for *Uru* showed a man in a
real-world elevator, the doors opening to reveal the Age of Teledahn.
It’s a concept a concept strikingly similar to a 1999 advertisement for
*Myst: Masterpiece Edition*, which describes the game as a way to
“forget everyday worries” and “get away from it all.” The implication in
both cases seems to be that these aren’t video games so much as they are
computer-generated vacations.

My point in all this is not to paint *Uru* as unoriginal but to
highlight the fact that it is in many senses a spiritual successor to
the intentions of *Myst*, even moreso than *Myst*’s direct sequels.
While *Uru* can be seen as an attempt to “reboot” the series, it was
also a callback to what had come before: smaller Ages, simpler goals,
and understated narrative.

This first game in the Atrus-free arc opens, predictably, with a
voiceover by Atrus. He is telling Yeesha about a dream Catherine had
which predicts that groups of humans will soon be drawn to D’ni by some
sort of supernatural compulsion. The dream also indicates that Yeesha
will be their guide. These people, naturally, are those who make up
*Uru*’s target audience, and once the intro ends, the game presents the
player with a sweeping view of her avatar standing in front of the
volcano from *The Book of Atrus.* (Like many aspects of *Uru*, a
familiarity with *Myst*’s backstory is assumed. The diehard fans are
served, but more casual players tend to be left in the dark.)

Inside the Cleft, a hologram of Yeesha explains the game’s objective by
way of a long and impassioned speech about a stream. This is consistent
with Yeesha’s depiction throughout the D’ni arc overall, which
invariably involves florid, barely-coherent speeches. She never gets the
usual *Myst*-style “getting to know you” routine (in which the player
would read her diary, snoop in her desk, etc), so as a character she
unfortunately becomes completely unreadable. She’s not a person, just a
preachy voice, and as a result her “quest” feels less like a personal
adventure and more like the bidding of an inscrutable deity.

Yeesha’s quest, “The Journey,” requires players to visit five D’ni Ages
and explore them as a neutral observer. In each Age there are seven
Journey Cloths, which the player must find in order to “complete” the
Age. These are generally placed strategically, forcing the player to
visit areas which serve Yeesha’s ultimate purpose: to teach the player
that the D’ni were evil. (More on that later.) The Journey Cloth
mechanic is a glorified easter-egg hunt, a fact which the game makes no
attempt to disguise. The original *Myst* used more or less the same
mechanic: the player visits an Age and searches for the red and blue
pages, stumbling across incriminating evidence on the way. However,
*Myst* took its egg hunt a step further by putting a prize inside each
egg: each of the red and blue pages unlocks a bit more of the brothers’
stories, drawing the player deeper into the narrative. The Journey
Cloths, by contrast, are simply arbitrary devices which eventually
unlock a state of completion. Likewise, “completing” an Age in *Uru*
doesn’t reveal additional story content, but another annoying sermon
from Yeesha. In both games the player finds evidence of wrongdoing while
exploring the Ages, but while Yeesha simply uses it to strengthen her
main thesis (D’ni = evil), the brothers of *Myst* spend most of their
time trying to disprove the player’s notions, creating a complicated
narrative tug-of-war not only between the brothers but between the
player and the game itself. *Uru*’s story, so far as it has one at all,
is far less sophisticated.

Luckily, the “Ages Beyond Myst” more than make up for the shortcomings
of gameplay and story. The five Ages vary considerably in size and all
follow a somewhat linear progression, but each has a unique atmosphere
and its own flavor of beautifully-executed visuals. *Uru* is about big
things, and it adeptly handles the grandiosity and intrigue of its
landscapes. Its handling of small details, unfortunately, is less
impressive. The game has very few of the close-up shots common in the
preceding games, and most on-screen objects are low-detailed and only
meant to be seen from afar. Whether this altered scope is a detriment or
a benefit is subject to debate. While I would have preferred a game
world that straddles both the epic and the intimate (such as *Riven*),
the grandiosity of its Ages still makes them worth a visit.

Each of the Ages in the game is meant to portray a different perspective
on D’ni’s sins, so let’s take a look at each in turn, beginning with
Teledahn. This Age, otherwise known as “the one with the mushrooms,” was
among the most anticipated locations in the game, as it was the subject
of many pre-release screenshots. It’s described as an extremely old Age,
one which changed hands many times over D’ni’s history. Players can
access to only a few acres’ worth of Teledahn, but the game does a
decent job of implying additional areas beyond what can be seen. The art
direction here is phenomenal, suggesting a murky, slimy place permeated
with stagnant smells and dust. The water teems with life, some visible,
some only heard, suggesting a rich ecosystem. There’s even an optional
puzzle in which the player coaxes a large lobsterlike creature to come
out of hiding just for the sake of looking at it. It’s a clever idea to
add these kinds of hidden details to the game world, and *Uru* should
have done a lot more along these lines.

Teledahn also introduces one of Yeesha’s most important pieces of
anti-D’ni evidence: the remnants of a secret slave trade. The addition
of slavery is the game’s most hamfisted attempt at sullying the D’ni
reputation, and yet it’s made clear that the slave trading was being
carried out in secret, which suggests that it was still against D’ni
law. One would think that something clearly defined as crime would be
irrelevant to Yeesha’s thesis, but no: Yeesha is more than willing to
judge an entire society on the sins of individuals.

Teledahn is also the only Age with an associated diary, the journal of
Douglas Sharper, an explorer affiliated with the D’ni Restoration
Council (DRC), a group of human explorers. Sharper’s job is the
“restoration” of Teledahn: exploring it, fixing its machinery, and
ensuring that it’s safe to visit. His diary records his daily activities
toward these ends, particularly dwelling on his frustrations with the
bureaucracy of the DRC. This is the primary source of information about
the DRC which we see in this game, and depicts it as a stagnant and
misguided organization which is blind to the “truth” about D’ni (e.g.,
that it was not a perfect society). As for Sharper himself, the journal
establishes little about his character other than his love of American
football. He appeared in the flesh for the privileged few who played
*Uru Live*, but for the rest of us Sharper is little more than a name,
because this journal is the most we’ll ever learn about him.

Gahreesen, an Age used by D’ni’s police force, is the only Age in the
game where we really get a sense of the strength of D’ni itself.
Gahreesen is dominated by huge fortresses (garrisons, as the name puns)
built on rotating pedestals. While the spinning buildings seem absurdly
unnecessary at first, we eventually come to understand that such designs
are the only way to ensure security against a technology like The Art.
(You can’t write a linking book which connects to a specific room if
that room is constantly in motion.) Gahreesen is filled with details
like these, which enhance its credibility greatly. It’s also the only
Age which requires you to visit another Age in order to complete it: a
secret link hidden in Teledahn is the only way to access the prison at
the top of the fortress. This does a lot to disrupt the linearity we
experience in the other Ages, so it’s a shame that the technique is only
used once. The nature of the Age highlights the differences between
Yeesha’s motivation and that of the DRC: Yeesha sees Gahreesen as
disgusting because it exemplifies the amount of work needed to protect
D’ni’s ill-gotten assets, but the DRC see it as a particularly
interesting example of D’ni’s engineering prowess. To the player,
Gahreesen is an enjoyable Age: the puzzles are about right, it uses the
possibilities of real-time gameplay admirably, and it gives us a lot of
nice scenery to look at.

Kadish Tolesa is more of a diversion; it’s similar to Amateria in that
it’s basically a collection of intentional puzzles. As the player
wanders through through the Age’s massive forest (home to some of the
game’s most beautiful scenes), she encounters a variety of puzzles
designed to safeguard the wealth of Guildmaster Kadish, one of the
richest men in D’ni at the time of the Fall. To complete the Age, the
player must look for clues in Kadish’s lavish antechamber and apply them
to the Age’s puzzles. As discussed previously, intentional puzzles
typically fail to be as engaging as those which exist for a genuine
reason, but the main credibility problem here is that Guildmaster Kadish
leaves the key to his vault lying in plain sight all the time, albeit in
an obtuse form. He does try to throw potential robbers off the trail,
though, by the inclusion of false doorways which imply a path leading in
one direction when the true path is hidden elsewhere. The game treats
this as background detail, but these red herrings suggest a different
direction the Age itself could have taken: what if Kadish was *itself* a
puzzle? What if these false doorways could be opened to reveal puzzles
that don’t actually lead anywhere? Or suppose instead we were faced with
many puzzles at a time, and only some of them were meant to be solved.
What if it were ultimately the path we travel through the age that
unlocked the vault, rather than the successful completion of sequential
puzzles? This would have been a far more difficult task for the level
designers, it’s true, but potentially could have been much more
interesting. Still, Kadish is a well-executed Age with a quiet, broody
atmosphere conveyed expertly through both visuals and sound, which
forgives its crimes in the puzzle department.

This brings us to the sister Ages of Eder Gira and Eder Kemo. These are
“garden Ages,” the kinds of places where the D’ni would go for a picnic.
Gira is an inhospitable desert, Kemo a horticultural masterwork. They’re
both fun to look at and explore, but they ultimately fall somewhat flat,
as they have no story engagement whatsoever. We learn nothing about the
D’ni from them, we don’t encounter any new characters, and we find
nothing which challenges our understanding of the world. In Kemo we find
a DRC notebook containing a D’ni fable involving a garden Age which was
taken from its prior inhabitants by force, and Yeesha attempts to imply
that the same was true of Gira and Kemo, but we don’t see any evidence
to support that. Games are a visual medium, and to make us, the players,
believe these kinds of assertions, we need to see some sort of evidence.
In the original *Myst*, we don’t come to believe that Achenar is bad
just because Sirrus says he is, but rather because we see direct
evidence of Achenar’s evildoings (and likewise for Sirrus, of course).
We never see anything to suggest that Gira and Kemo were ever anything
but the bland, small parks that they are today, so Yeesha’s sermon in
this case seems to be reaching.

Once the Ages are complete, the player eventually is able to return to
the Cleft and retrieve a final message from Yeesha, who warns us that
there will soon be a major schism between the explorers of D’ni: half
will side with the DRC and their tedious, superficial mission and the
other half will side with Yeesha. By this point, however, neither of
these groups have done much to attract the player’s allegiance. The DRC
come across as tiresome bureaucrats who prefer protocol to the thrill of
discovery. Yeesha comes across as a killjoy who seems to think that all
closets must contain skeletons. Her own obsession is with the *bahro*,
mysterious creatures that she insists were oppressed by the D’ni. The
topic of the *bahro* is not sufficiently explored in this chapter,
leaving them as little more than an enigma, an element foreign to all
previous installments which never quite manages to sit comfortably.

I’m personally not inclined to side with Yeesha or the DRC. Neither
really subscribe to the *Myst* mentality of wandering for its own sake,
which is particularly strange when you consider that *Uru*, with its
limited story content, is perhaps the purest example of that approach.
(Also, it seems somewhat odd, and self-defeating, that Cyan would
actively encourage its online players to become ideologically divided in
this way.) There’s something of an echo here of the original’s “two bad
choices and a good choice,” but in actuality there’s no choice available
at all, just an imaginary conflict which we couldn’t participate in even
if we wanted to.

Yeesha’s message, in this and the two installments which follow, is that
the Art corrupted D’ni society just as deeply as it did that of
Terahnee, just on a subtler level. Where Yeesha’s arguments fail,
however, is the fact that she holds up examples of *individual*
wrongdoing to imply that the society overall is corrupt. This is known
as the fallacy of composition: a society can contain evildoers while not
being evil itself. As aficionados of the D’ni universe, many *Myst* fans
were somewhat disappointed by *Uru*’s depiction of the D’ni as a corrupt
race, and that it’s done in this way makes it even worse. Were there
criminals in D’ni? Yes, of course. Was it necessary for D’ni’s entire
populace to die in order to atone for their sins? I would say not, but
Yeesha argues unwaveringly on the point that the Fall was deserved
retribution. This position is shallow, callous, and succeeds only in
making Yeesha appear irrationally attached to a moral which only she can
see.

Ultimately, what is *Uru*? Unlike its predecessors, it is not a story
game. While the Yeesha/DRC conflict forms a story of sorts, the primary
narrative is one formed by the player herself based on her observations
of the D’ni ruins. *Uru* is about wandering, looking at the world, and
imagining what it was in its prime. And even as we consider the Ages’
fictional histories, we’re also aware of the alternative *Uru*, the one
where the Ages were filled with fellow explorers and new content
appeared on a daily basis. The success of this single-player version
depends largely on your own attention and imagination.

During this last playthrough, I happened to notice a small door high on
the wall of the Teledahn slave office. I’d never spotted it before, and
it has no relevance to the gameplay. But someone decided to put it
there, both in the game’s universe and in the real world of game
development. Why is it there? No one can say. But imagining the
possibilities is, ultimately, what *Uru* came to be about.
