---
title: The Great Tree of Possibilities
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/conclusion/
layout: myst
---

![The imager room in Myst](/assets/images/myst/12-conclusion.jpg)

> “Take from the past only that which is good.” - Atrus

Popular culture has a remarkably short attention span, especially so in
the world of video games. Talk to many video game enthusiasts and you’ll
get the impression that a game released five years ago is ancient
history, archaic as the Model T, something their grandparents played.
Many people react to these antique games with something akin to disdain,
as if they were discoveries from the back of the refrigerator. This is
no doubt due in part to how closely games are tied to the forward march
of computer technology; it is inevitable that a game from five years ago
is going to appear graphically inferior to one produced today. That
said, while games are dependent upon imperfect technologies, it is
important to remember that the best games strive to transcend these
limitations and excel despite them. This is the context in which we’ve
been examining the *Myst* series: it’s twenty years old, placing it
somewhere between Gilgamesh and Beowulf in video game years, but like
any work from antiquity, it still has power and meaning worth examining.
As we wrap up this journey, I want to take a final look back to consider
what the *Myst* series accomplished, why it’s important, and what its
significance will be in the future.

Here’s the formula: You play as a character with no name or personality
beyond what you project onto it: essentially, you play as yourself. You
are plunged into an unfamiliar environment, with no real understanding
at first of the world or its characters. By exploring, you learn about
the characters and their stories. Eventually you will encounter some of
them, and in the end you will be asked to make a decision which will
impact their lives. Along the way you will encounter obstacles which can
be overcome by utilizing logic and clues found during your explorations.
You are an active participant in a story. You are not the protagonist.

All the games adhere to this framework. Some of them take more liberties
with it than others, and most contain additional elements which aren’t
necessarily present in the others. This structure has proven its
reliability as a foundation for interactive storytelling, and luckily
it’s also vague enough that it can support an infinite variety of
stories, with or without Linking Books. Broad as it is, there are still
a few more specific elements which need to be included to attain the
unique *Myst *flavor.

The most obvious of these, and probably the most widely discussed, is a
concept we might call “secondhand characterization.” The characters of
the stories, and by extension the stories themselves, are experienced
not by witnessing them directly, but by examining objects related to
them. These effects can be very intimate (a diary, a bed) or a very
public (the Gold Dome). In either case, the player meets the characters
in this metaphorical sense long before encountering them in person–if
she ever does. Counterintuitively, this technique often provides a
fuller knowledge of character than more traditional methods. Sirrus and
Achenar, for example, come across as fairly trustworthy before their
sadistic belongings reveal them as lying psychopaths. Other media use
this technique as well, of course; any well-made novel or movie will
include details about characters’ belongings. But what makes *Myst*’s
approach truly remarkable is that it uses this method as its primary
narrative device, making dialogue and face-to-face encounters almost
marginal in many cases. In most media, this technique would probably be
tedious, but in an interactive space, it proves to be a remarkably
strong formula. If we’re playing a game, we want to be *doing*
something, even if it’s just rooting around in someone’s cabinets. (Of
course, surreptitiously investigating the belongings of friends and
relatives is an age-old pastime anyway. *Myst*’s popularity is probably
in part due to the way it taps into the innate nosiness of humankind.)
Examining people’s things is an interactive way to experience their
personalities, and as such it made for a potent storytelling tool in
this context.

Another important device which the series employs regularly is the
concept of landscape as character. Scenery in *Myst* is rarely presented
as a simple backdrop, but rather as a complex and storied living thing
with its own distinct personality. Each Age we visit has its own unique
atmosphere, which both enhances player engagement and differentiates it
from other Ages. While there are some similarities between, say,
Channelwood and Narayan, both have many distinguishing characteristics
which make them very different overall. Just as we get to know the human
characters, we slowly become familiar with the traits of the worlds as
well: Riven’s peculiar water, the crumbling archways of Kadish Tolesa,
the glowing ore deposits of Amateria. This isn’t to say that the only
differences are visual; sound, especially music, plays a strong role as
well. While the first game was forced to re-use many sounds simply due
to technical restrictions, most of the games use unique sounds in every
area, creating auditory zones that can be differentiated even if the
player’s eyes are closed. (I highly recommend closing your eyes while
playing every once in a while. There’s a lot of truly remarkable sound
design in these games.)

Most of the Ages also contain distinct sub-areas: Riven is of course the
most obvious example, but even small Ages like Stoneship demonstrate
this. The lighthouse, the ship, the telescope, the two bedrooms, and the
compass rose are all part of the same Age. They are very different in
form and even in overall aesthetics (to some degree), but they combine
harmoniously to form the full picture of what “Stoneship” is.

To call the construction of these environments “level design” does them
a disservice; even Cyan’s term “world assembly” seems awfully clinical.
Just as the characters write Ages, the places we visit in the game are
very much *written, *in the sense that fiction is; each one is a work of
art in its own right, even divorced from any other context. Within
context, of course, they are one of many elements which support the
game’s overall structure, but make no mistake: in a game about
exploration, success hinges almost entirely on the strength of the
environments.

Equally prevalent in this series, but rarely discussed, is the concept
of the player as a non-character participant. In most games, the player
character, regardless of how thoroughly they’re developed, plays a
central role in the events of the game, and is almost invariably the
game’s protagonist. This isn’t completely true of *Myst*. While the
player character does perform actions which further the story, he is not
developed at all (never mentioned by name anywhere), and is not included
in the storyline’s drama. The player character is on the sidelines,
literally pushing the switches which move the story forward, but the
bulk of the narrative is backstory (which is non-participatory by
definition) and character interaction (which is non-participatory in
this series). The player becomes, in a way, a witness to the story, and
her only ability to affect its outcome arrives in the form of the
bad-ending vs. good-ending choices. (And since the bad endings aren’t
“real,” the choice is somewhat deceptive.) Think of the series as a play
in which you’re seated on stage. You can move through the set and
examine it from different angles, but you’re not one of the actors, and
the action will play out the same regardless of what you do. While in
most of the games we play “The Stranger,” the actual protagonist (or, in
many cases, sympathetic villain) changes: in the first game it’s Atrus,
then Gehn, Saavedro, Yeesha/Achenar, etc. The significance of this is
somewhat interesting: when the player character is the protagonist, a
game incorporates the player into its story to a degree which no other
medium can emulate. By placing the player alongside the story, *Myst* is
presenting itself as a more traditional sort of narrative, one in which
the audience sees but does not participate in the action.

If a story is going to be based on the interactions between its
characters, then naturally those characters must be fairly
well-developed. In general *Myst* succeeds at this, particularly in the
sense that it presents multiple sides of its characters. The primary way
that *Myst* builds multifaceted characters is by introducing
discrepancies between what characters say and what we find out about
them elsewhere. Many of the characters are unreliable, willing to
distort the truth or lie outright when it suits their purposes, but we
get to know them well enough that we can not only understand that
they’re lying, but we can understand *why* they’re lying. This is a
large part of why *Uru* and *End of Ages* seem comparatively shallow: we
don’t see very many sides of their characters, so they don’t in general
seem very complex. For the most part, though, this series does character
well, creating people who are both believable and relatable, regardless
of whether we’re rooting for them or against them.

Finally, the series uses puzzles as a prominent gameplay mechanic, and
always attempts to disguise them as natural parts of the environment.
This is sadly the area in which these games most often stumble; none of
the games manage to perfectly incorporate every puzzle (although *Riven*
comes close) and many puzzles are obvious “roadblocks” which could serve
no practical function in real life. Making all the puzzles serve
real-world functions is, of course, a tall order. Real life objects are
generally designed to be straightforward, and so people are unlikely to
design things which are overly cryptic or complicated, photocopiers
notwithstanding. Coming up with an object which is plausible both as a
puzzle and as a functional device isn’t easy, so I do cut the designers
some slack here, especially since in most cases they do at least make an
effort to incorporate the puzzles into the universe. We’re never once
asked to “play Mastermind with the dragon,”[^7] and I respect them for
that.

The elements defined above are a large part of *Myst’*s success. In many
ways the series was a new kind of narrative, but in others it was a
traditional narrative presented in a new way. People love stories, and
they love new stories and new narrative techniques. The first *Myst*
arrived at a time when personal computers were still something new; even
by the time *Riven* came around many people still didn’t have computers
in their homes. The novelty of personal computers created an increased
demand for things to do with them, and a game which presented a clear,
original story, complete with attractive imagery, easily filled that
niche, and in retrospect it’s not that surprising that it sold as well
as it did. This is not to cast a shadow over its strength as a work of
art, which should go without saying by this point, but it is worth
considering exactly *why* it became the original “bestselling game of
all time,” *despite* the fact that it’s often remembered as something
boring or frustrating. At the simplest level, these games present a
story, one which can be enjoyed without the difficult button-mashing
which was more prevalent at the time, and there was (and still is) a lot
of demand for that.

And what of the novels? Exactly how they fit into the grand scheme of
things is somewhat unclear. By and large, knowledge of the novels is not
critical to enjoyment of the games, although some details will be
obscure without them. Furthermore, the novels are not great examples of
novel writing in the same way that the games are examples of great game
design. I would say that the most important thing to recognize in the
novels is the fact that they demonstrate the innate potential of the
*Myst* universe; that the legacy of D’ni provides a foundation for an
endless number of stories, within or without the confines of video
games.

So where do we go from here? At this point it appears unlikely that
Cyan, Ubisoft, or any other entity intend to make another
mainstream-release *Myst* game. Likewise, *The Book of Marrim* has been
stagnant for so long I think we can safely assume that it’s kaput. The
fact is, a corporate entity needs to see evidence of money to be made
before they’re willing to invest in publishing something, and at this
point the “Myst” name isn’t one that guarantees success. But, as we’ve
established, *Myst*’s universe still has some life left in it. This
makes it fertile ground for fan creations of any kind. I have at times
come down kind of hard on the concept of a *Myst* movie, due largely to
my concerns over mishandling of the material. But if the project is in
the hands of people who know and understand the series… bring it on.
There’s nothing I’d like better. Projects like “Starry Expanse,” the
realtime *Riven* re-make, are likewise wonderful endeavors. While
there’s nothing wrong with *Riven’*s graphics, they are very low
resolution, and it’s high time to see that corrected. Projects like
these pass the torch from the original creators to an entirely new set
of artists, whose interpretations have the potential to meet or even
exceed the concepts of the originals. I encourage Cyan to maintain its
lenient policies on such works in the future.

Even more importantly, we should remember that the formula of *Myst*
need not only apply to games about Linking Books. Secondhand
characterization, landscape as character, the non-character participant,
integrated puzzles: all of these are concepts which can be applied
outside the D’ni universe, and it is here that the truly infinite nature
of the formula becomes clear.

The video game sphere can at times seem saturated with titles about
specific *abilities*: “simulations” of war, survival, future
technologies, magic, superhuman traits, et cetera. There’s a place for
these games, and there are plenty of reasons to like them: there’s
something really exciting about being handed, say, the gun from *Portal*
and given free reign over its unique teleportation mechanic. We want to
use this medium to experience things we can’t do in real life. The
beauty of the adventure game, however, is that it rarely involves
*doing* anything unusual, but is rather about *being* somewhere unusual.
*Portal*’s story, amusing as it is, exists primarily to serve as a
backbone for the main attraction: solving puzzles using the Handheld
Portal Device. In an adventure game, the story *is* the primary
attraction, and as such a successful adventure game must have a strong
story. For the most part, *Myst* succeeded on this front, and should be
recognized for that. Maligned as the games are by many people today,
there’s a lot which can be learned from them, and a lot to be enjoyed.
Its overarching storyline is likewise a complex and multifaceted thing,
suitable for many more treatments. And the adventure game genre itself
is undergoing something of a renaissance. Game designers are building
story games again, and many of them are well worth a look for *Myst*
fans, video game enthusiasts, and, yes, initiates from the general
public. Exciting things are happening. The genre which *Myst*
revolutionized in 1993, which has for a while seemingly died away, is
coming back in force. It’s a trend which needs to be encouraged,
nurtured, and contributed to. Buy these games. Talk about them. If you
have the inclination, make some of your own. Yes, it’s that theme from
*Uru* coming back one last time: this isn’t the time to sit in the ruins
of a once-proud civilization. It’s time to build a new civilization, one
with worlds and stories to rival Gehn’s wildest dreams.