---
title: End of Ages
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/endofages/
layout: myst
---


![A bahro, a bubble, and a pedestal on Noloben](/assets/images/myst/11-endofages.jpg)

> “Consider it a ‘Myst’ opportunity.” - Esher

Considering what a vast and varied journey it’s been, definitively
wrapping up the series is a tall order. We have loose ends from Atrus’s
family turmoils, we still don’t know Yeesha that well, the question of
the Restoration is still in the air, and that’s not even mentioning the
*bahro*. A strong conclusion will need to cover those points, but should
also allow us to revisit a few of our favorite old haunts and see some
new places as well. *Myst V: End of Ages* hits some of these notes. It
has a handful of nice character moments, a few spectacular Ages, and the
occasional pinch of nostalgia. Unfortunately, it also has some serious
flaws that greatly diminish the experience. Is it a fitting end for the
series? Considering some of the high points we’ve seen, for the most
part it isn’t. At best it’s a *predictable* end to the series,
delivering most of the elements we’ve come to expect, both the good and
the bad.

The game opens with an Atrus voiceover. (Well, why not, every other game
has followed this convention and there’s no need to break a precedent,
even when it doesn’t make sense anymore.) Atrus talks about how he’s
lost everything and everyone he ever cared about, including (he thinks)
Yeesha, and ends by saying that he will soon go on to a better place.
The implication seems to be that he’s dead, which Yeesha shortly later
emphasizes by saying that Atrus’s “time has passed.” It’s a somewhat
grim start; it feels like finding out about the death of a friend
secondhand. At the end of the game, of course, it turns out that Atrus
isn’t dead at all; the whole thing was just a *metaphorical *way of
saying he lives in Releeshahn now. It’s hard to guess why the game is
set up this way. Nothing is really gained by this deception, unless
making the player depressed right at the outset can be considered
beneficial. Even when we find out Atrus is still alive, it’s not so much
a relief as it is an irritation, because then we feel like we’ve been
lied to. It’s a minor point, but it does affect the tone of the game,
coming at the beginning as it does.

Once the intro is complete the player character arrives in Atrus’s old
prison in K’veer, without any real understanding of why he’s there or
how he got there. The place is crawling with *bahro*, which up until
this point have been seen only once. It’s a bit disconcerting to see so
many all of a sudden, but it does set the stage for the game we’re about
to play, because it is all about the *bahro*, for better or for worse.

Also noticeable right from the outset is the new game interface, a
realtime 3D world with point-and-click navigation. The game defaults to
a “classic” mode in which we have the fixed viewpoints familiar from the
*Myst* and *Riven* era, only with the addition of smooth transitions
between points. There’s also a “classic plus” mode, which is similar to
that of *Exile* in that it allows the player to look around smoothly by
using the mouse. This seems ideal to me; it makes the world seem free
and immersive without the nuisance of steering around things (although
there’s an option for that as well, for anyone who prefers it). This
node-based navigation is not without its quirks, though. The nodes can
sometimes be far apart and at strange angles to each other, and the
transition speed is noticeably faster than a walking pace, so sliding
between them often feels unnatural. Still, it strikes a nice balance
between the freedom of realtime environments and the simplicity of the
point-and-click system, and overall I think it’s the best navigation
scheme of any of the games.

As for the realtime graphics themselves, it is a very noticeable
difference, though not always in a good way. The environments, while
very attractive, aren’t as realistic as those of the pre-rendered era,
and the first-person perspective calls attention to this (moreso than
did the third-person perspective in *Uru*). And while realtime
environments can hypothetically lead to more dynamic surroundings, the
amount of movement and wildlife onscreen fails to measure up to the
standards set by *Revelation*. The jungles of Haven, for example, are
teeming with animals, most of them not visibly looping, whereas an age
like Laki’ahn has only one animal species, and all it ever does is run
in a tight circle. Some effects are nice, such as the waves at the
water’s edge and the swaying grass, but these Ages do in general seem
more static than anything we saw in *Revelation*. (To be fair,
*Revelation* set a remarkably high standard in that regard.) The Ages
also seem quite small, in terms of explorable area, compared to many
earlier examples. I’m not asking for a gigantic world like Riven, which
is obviously beyond this game’s scope, but many of the Ages here have
less variety than even relatively tiny Ages like Stoneship. Note that
this is not to say that the Ages are unattractive: some of them are
among the most beautiful of any of the games. Noloben in particular was
well-known from early *Uru* screenshots, and it doesn’t disappoint. As
realtime environments go, it’s hard to say anything bad about them, but
in carrying over the control schemes of the pre-rendered era, their
shortcomings are more apparent.

The other issue introduced by realtime graphics is the depiction of
in-game characters. *End of Ages* represents its characters by pairing
the face of an actor with a motion-captured CGI body, an effect which
tends to land squarely in the Uncanny Valley. They look more realistic
than the CGI characters of *Uru* (which is important considering how
much time we spend looking at them), but certain elements of the
character models (irregular specularities on the faces, drawing errors
at sharp angles, and seemingly random gestures) are off-putting and
distracting. It’s disappointing that Cyan decided to go this route,
considering that *realMyst* demonstrated that it’s possible to combine
realtime sets with full-body actors, but in general this method does at
least work well enough.

Getting back to the game itself, the player finally gets to step outside
the locked room in K’veer and head down the hallway outside. It’s worth
noting that this area is a rare example of a place from the novels
making an appearance in the games, and as I traverse it I can’t help but
imagine Gehn dragging the young Atrus up these stairs to begin his
imprisonment. At the end of the hallway the player finds a room
containing a weird giant bubble surrounded by tusks. Inside the bubble
is a mysterious golden thingie that makes a weird noise when touched.
The walls of the bubble constantly shift to show other Ages, which makes
for some nice subtle foreshadowing.

Upon stepping out of the bubble the player is accosted by Yeesha in the
first of many, many speeches he will have to endure. Yeesha has aged
visibly since the events of *Uru* and in that time has transitioned from
all-powerful demigod to crazy cat lady. Her ramblings are even more
incoherent than usual, and her vague description of the journey ahead
doesn’t really enhance the player’s understanding of anything. “What you
still don’t understand,” Yeesha says, “you have failed to hear or don’t
need to know.” If only everyone had access to such a convenient
disclaimer. As the game progresses the statement begins to feel more and
more like an apology for the mess of plot holes and dead ends the story
becomes entangled in. Luckily, though, we won’t be subjected to much
Yeesha-rambling this time around. In fact, we won’t be seeing much of
Yeesha at all, because most of the speechifying will be performed by the
delightful personage known as Esher.

Esher is a survivor of the Fall who has taken it upon himself to follow
the player around and lecture him at every opportunity. Up until this
point we’d never met an actual D’ni citizen in the games. This means
that the events of the games are always viewed from an outsider’s
perspective. Since the player is himself an outsider, there’s something
to be said for that arrangement, but with this many installments it’s
high time that we get a peek at the D’ni interpretation of events for a
change. We need a D’ni character, one who can fill in our understanding
of its history from the other side. Esher is not that character. At
times he seems to have depth, to be as wise as his advanced age would
lead us to expect, and other times he’s a vitriolic and embittered
one-note villain. He’s like a senile grandpa who alternates between
quiet reminiscing and paranoid ravings. Esher doesn’t provide any real
insights on the D’ni mindset because he’s so dead-set on his cartoonish
agenda, speaking over and over again on the same points: he hates
Yeesha, he hates the *bahro*, and he wants to see D’ni returned to its
former glory. He makes many, many speeches over the course of the game,
reiterating all these points *ad nauseaum*, yet in all other things
maintaining a careful vagueness to keep us from learning about his
character, or backstory, or any of those tedious kinds of things. (And
while he says he wants to help with the quest, he gives puzzle hints
only about once per Age.) The deeply personal soliloquoys of Gehn or
Saavedro are not in evidence. These are lectures, plain and simple,
giving us no insight into either Esher himself or to the world of the
D’ni at large. To put it bluntly, Esher’s execution is awful. His
speeches are so transparently worthless that the player begins to dread
his frequent appearances, becoming hesitant of moving anywhere for fear
that he’ll appear. The frequency of his speeches could perhaps be
forgiven if he was at least saying something interesting, but in
general, to hear one of his speeches is to hear all of them. Esher is
just plain annoying, and the few moments when he seems like an
interesting character are subverted in the endings, both of which reveal
him to be a delusional psychopath. Esher, and even the entire
speechifying mechanic, have good potential, and seeing them wasted this
way is disappointing.

After enduring speeches from both Yeesha and Esher, the player finds
himself atop the volcano near the Cleft, where the passage to D’ni
begins. We’ve seen only glimpses of this in *Uru*, and won’t get to see
a lot of it here either, but it’s still nice to be able to visit it
firsthand. The area surrounding the Great Shaft becomes a sort of
explorational hub, functioning much like Myst Island or J’nanin in that
it contains Linking Books connecting us to the game’s various Ages. (It
is unlike the aforementioned Ages insofar as the books aren’t protected
by corresponding puzzles.)

Strangely enough, the books we find in the Great Shaft don’t link
directly to the Ages, but to an intermediate age called Direbo, where we
can link to the Ages via weird bubbles and pedestals with nary a Book
involved. In fact, Books will be used only for Linking to and from
Direbo; all other Linking is accomplished by *bahro* magic, and occurs
very, very frequently. There’s so much Linking in this game, and so many
ways to do it, that it begins to feel mundane. It’s a big change from
the pre-*Uru* era, where Linking is performed rarely, and under very
specific conditions, so that it feels somewhat exciting and special.
*End of Ages* utilizes Linking as a puzzle mechanic a lot, which while
not an inherently bad idea, does make Linking banal after a while. It no
longer means we’re about to transition something special, it’s just a
means to an end. Even the iconic Linking sound becomes a lot less
intriguing when you hear it six or seven times in the process of solving
a puzzle. Linking has a mystique, if you’ll pardon the pun, one which
suffers considerably when overused as it is here.

The game’s puzzles tend to fall into a handful of different categories,
many of which we’re all too familiar with already. Each Age contains at
least one puzzle which is dependent on the ability of the *bahro* to
alter the laws of the universe, a skill which can be utilized by drawing
specific pictograms which they interpret. Pictograms are also used to
enable Linking between specific locations within an Age. These puzzles
are somewhat central to the *End of Ages* experience, but they’re
repetitive in their approach, so the novelty wears off as players begin
to realize that it’s really the only original element the game will
bring to the table. The other puzzles are, by and large, varieties we’ve
seen before: trial and error, machines without manuals, and locks whose
combinations are left lying around. While puzzles have never been my
favorite element of this series, those seen here have a particular
tendency to feel phoned-in. Most have no clear in-universe function
(such as the weighted podium in Laki’ahn) and none of them feel remotely
original. The crystal organ and mangree puzzles in *Revelation* were
frustrating, to be sure, but they were at least trying to do something
interesting (and both are tied directly to the game’s storyline). If I’m
going to have to think to solve puzzles, I want to see some evidence
that the creators put thought into creating them.

As I mentioned already, the Ages are small but visually impeccable, and
while they often don’t offer many things to do, just looking at them and
wandering through them is a worthwhile experience. The *bahro* pedestals
(the waypoints of the pictogram puzzles) actually complement the Ages
relatively well from an explorational standpoint; in placement and
function they are are similar to the Journey Cloths in *Uru,* but
provide a more interesting mechanic to work with. While navigating from
one pedestal to another can still be tedious at times, it’s not as
incremental as searching for Journey Cloths over and over again. The
pedestals, while not perfect, are in many ways what the Journey Cloths
should have been, interactive objects which enable easier movement
throughout the landscape. (Despite my gripes with the overuse of
Linking, it is a convenient system, particularly in games without a Zip
Mode function.) Like *Uru*, *End of Ages* is primarily about taking in
the scenery, and to that end it really is designed quite well.

We’ll examine each of the Ages in brief, starting with Taghira (or, as I
call it, “The Li’lest Age”). It’s probably the smallest and most
inconsequential of any Age we’ve ever seen, and while pretty it’s the
most forgettable part of this game. It’s a Prison Age, and a pretty
brutal one at that: it’s nothing but a huge frozen rock surrounded by an
unending ocean.[^5] In any case, Taghira is a featureless wasteland,
nothing but white ice and a small handful of funny-looking trees, around
which the prisoners built an elaborate heating system. It’s not that
Taghira is ugly or uninteresting, it just doesn’t have that much to see
or do. There’s no sign of any of the former inmates, no personal effects
of any kind. Aside from the weird trees, Taghira doesn’t have anything
that you can’t see in the Rime Age from *realMyst*, and in fact Rime
contains a number of elements which Taghira doesn’t. And yet Rime is
just a “bonus” while Taghira is one of this game’s central locations.
The concept of exploring a Prison Age is a fascinating one, particularly
if we could get to know the stories of the prisoners, but Taghira, while
pretty, seems to be little more than a dry run intended to demonstrate
basic gameplay mechanics.

Progressing down through the Great Shaft, we next come to Todelmer, an
Age designed to be conducive to astronomy. I imagine that some people
may have been put off by its science-fiction vibe, but for my money,
Todelmer is one of the most visually spectacular Ages of the series.
Todelmer’s sky is dominated by every astronomical feature imaginable,
everything from garish nebulae to colossal planets, and it’s hard to
look in any direction without seeing something mind-bogglingly
beautiful. The explorable area is located atop improbably tall rocky
spires which rise from a very intriguing-looking surface, completely
inaccessible but begging to be explored. What also helps Todelmer is the
plausibility of its concept: any astronomer would want to study from
such a place, given the ability to travel to one, so it’s a natural step
for the D’ni to Write this. Among the highly mundane Ages we encounter
so often in the *Uru* era (Nexus: the Age of Public Transportation),
Todelmer stands out as one which was written for a specific function,
but takes full advantage of the all-encompassing power of the Art.

Next we arrive at Noloben, the Age where Esher lived following the Fall.
As mentioned earlier, the aesthetic of Noloben is unique and attractive,
a rich combination of surreal beachscapes, windworn rock, and lush
grass. Where Todelmer is beautiful in a stark and titanic way, Noloben’s
beauty is more personal. The only real problem with it is in its story
content, in that there hardly is any. This is a place where Esher lived
for many, many decades, and yet his “lab” has the appearance of a
recently-rented apartment that he has barely started moving into. He has
a cage, some grim-looking tools, and a few scraps of unrealistic notes,
and it’s just not enough to create a believable workspace, let alone a
living area. (I suppose it’s possible his actual living quarters were on
a different island, but still we should be allowed to see them, because
therein is the strength of this series.) Noloben presented some
opportunities for a dramatic exploration of character, in much the same
vein as Gehn’s legacy on Riven–and Esher was effectively stranded in
*his* Age for something like three times as long. The scenery is nice,
but there should have been more stuff here.

The final Age resumes the theme of the Evil D’ni which was so sadly
lacking from the preceding two: Laki’ahn is an Age dedicated to blood
sport. Specifically, it is dedicated to watching native warriors battle
ferocious marine animals in order to harvest valuable gems from within
their bodies. At this point I think we’ve all become pretty jaded to the
sins of the D’ni, but this particular chapter seems almost petty. So the
D’ni enjoyed watching dangerous sports. So do most real-world societies.
They endorsed the slaughter of animals. Most real-world societies
slaughter huge numbers of animals for various reasons. They forced the
locals to fight on their behalf. Well, that’s implied but there’s no
direct evidence of that, and in all likelihood the natives were
experienced at hunting these things already, so in that sense the D’ni
were nothing more than spectators. Furthermore, the arena has less
seating than most high school jogging tracks, suggesting that this
wasn’t actually a very popular sport. So I’m not that impressed by this
as a demonstration of collective sin. As for the aesthetics of the Age,
it’s attractive but somewhat bland. It’s a tropical-resort kind of
place, and while it has a handful of unique elements (the huge smooth
boulders, the weird bird-things) it doesn’t have anything we haven’t
seen before. It is expansive, easily dwarfing all the other Ages in the
game in terms of explorable area, but (once again) there’s not much
story content, and overall it tends to look fairly uniform.

Once the Ages are complete, we are linked back to K’veer and granted
access to the golden Tablet, which supposedly unlocks the full power of
the *bahro*. Yeesha insists that we shouldn’t give her the Tablet,
although she does want it, and since there’s no reason to give it to
her, it’s a pretty clear bad ending. Esher, ever conniving, comes up
with his own plan to get his mitts on it: he plays on the player’s
nostalgia by telling him to bring it to Myst Island. Naturally the
player wants to go to Myst Island, especially since the descriptive
panel reveals it to be destroyed by tempestuous weather. The first time
I played this game I already figured that the solution was to give the
Tablet to the *bahro* (thereby effectively giving them dominion over
themselves), but I figured I’d just go ahead and link to Myst and give
it to them once I had a look-round. Well, it doesn’t work that way.
Going to Myst is an automatic bad ending, because even if you do drop
the Tablet, the *bahro* don’t show up. The only choice left is to give
it to Esher and watch him make a comical fool of himself, cackling
maniacally, handing out gratuitous insults, and explaining how this will
help him defeat Batman. I’m tempted to apologize for this setup and say
that it’s actually an ingenious way of playing against the player’s
desires, offering her something she wants, but only if she’s willing to
lose the game to get it. Could it be a metaphor for the tablet, which
the characters want but comes at a cost of their humanity? But anything
sounds good if you just analyze it to death, and I do think this is
something of a problem. I knew not to give Esher the tablet, but I just
wanted to see good ol’ Myst Island again. The *bahro* can and do travel
everywhere else, so I figured it wouldn’t be a problem. If that one
little issue was corrected I wouldn’t be complaining, but it’s in there,
and I’ve always been a little bit miffed by it.

As for the *good* ending, the *bahro* snatch the Tablet quite readily
once the player drops it, and Yeesha falls to her knees and thanks him
for accomplishing the “impossible” task of relinquishing the Tablet to
the *bahro*. The Tablet is one of these One Ring sorts of things which
grant so much power that no one can relinquish them, but to the player
the tablet does literally nothing (it can’t even be used to invoke the
pictograms from earlier in the game), so the decision to get rid of it
is something of a no-brainer. Granted, it would be difficult to give the
player godlike powers in the final act, but it would be nice to get at
least a little taste of the Tablet’s much-advertised powers.

Now that the *bahro* are their own masters, they teleport us to
Releeshahn, where we get a reunion scene with Yeesha and a
suddenly-not-dead Atrus. Yeesha talks in her usual vague shtick and
Atrus does the thing where he thanks the player for his trouble. Atrus’s
facial videos are the most disconcerting of the three characters,
resembling a weird-looking ventriloquist dummy, and the camera drifts
slowly backward as he approaches, as if trying to keep its distance.
Yeesha is also odd in most of this scene; whenever she isn’t talking she
stands off to the side with an expression like a petulant teenager.[^6]
Esher gets in one last appearance as a prisoner of the *bahro*,
screeching about how he’s the Grower and saying pretty much anything
that will succeed in painting him as a total lunatic. Esher had so much
potential as a good character, and it’s sad that neither ending allows
him to keep at least his dignity if not his sanity. In any case, the
*bahro* take him away to an unspecified fate and quickly give the player
a lift in order to get a better look at Releeshahn. It’s a
beautiful-looking place, a testament to the Art’s ability to provide an
ideal place to live…kind of like Terahnee.

There’s one other element to this ending that merits special
consideration. There’s an implication, one never voiced outright but
nonetheless in evidence, that the freedom of the *bahro* means that the
Art will no longer work. (See, for example, Yeesha’s diaries, which
suggest that the Art is dependent on the subjugation of the *bahro*, not
to mention the game’s very title.) Beyond the fact that this contradicts
everything we ever knew about it (the Ink comes from special beetles,
remember?), it’s a pretty depressing way to end the series, since the
Art was the thing that made it so exciting. (It also taints all the
preceding games, as even Atrus becomes complicit in the enslavement of
the *bahro*.) It effectively means that the happy ending is based on
turning your back on the premise of the series and passing the torch to
one of its most unpopular elements. I don’t hate the *bahro*, but I’ve
certainly not been given much reason to care about them. This ending is
only positive in the light of the Evil D’ni interpretation, in which the
Art was nothing more than a tool of oppression. But as we’ve seen, the
Art is far more than that. It’s a means of escape, a medium of art, a
source of pleasure, a tool of science, a supplier of food, a *freaking
mass transit system*. Anyone who would advocate extinguishing the Art,
especially on pretenses as ill-founded as Yeesha’s, is not a hero. That
person is a villain–and a very short-sighted one at that. If the Art
*is *dependent on the subjugation of the *bahro *(and there is little
evidence of that outside of this game), then that is a problem which
much be addressed. But it should be addressed in a way which is amenable
to everyone: strike a bargain with the *bahro* that enables their
freedom and pays them fairly for whatever it is they contribute. *Uru’*s
condemnation of the D’ni was bad enough, but *End of Ages* comes across
as a condemnation of the Art itself, a twist which any *Myst* fan will
find depressing.

We’ve already discussed problems with characterization and premise, but
even beyond these issues the game’s story doesn’t make a whole lot of
sense. The existence of the Slates and the *bahro* are never explained
in any way. Esher implies that the *bahro* placed the pedestals, but why
they can’t just release the Tablet themselves is never discussed.
Neither do we learn why they’re bound by the system in the first place.
Yeesha leaves a series of journals lying around Saavedro-style which
provide a mention of how she discovered the Tablet and the Slates in the
first place, but no real detail is given. Her journals also give us
brief insight into a friendship, possibly even a romance, which she
struck up with a D’ni survivor named Calam. However, in characteristic
Yeesha fashion, the details of this are obfuscated and glossed over,
even the seemingly critical point that *Calam was murdered and that
Yeesha killed his murderer.* That somehow seems like something we might
want to know more about.

There’s an interesting distinction to be drawn between *End of Ages *and
the original *Myst*. In *Myst*, we start off knowing nothing about the
world or the story. Gradually we are able to put together the pieces
until nearly all the story elements are revealed. There are a few things
which remain vague, such as the specifics of Sirrus and Achenar’s final
crime, but we get all the basics. In *End of Ages*, we start out with a
limited understanding of the world and the story, and the game never
really builds on that. The questions which are unanswered at the
beginning are by and large still unanswered at the end. “Myst” was the
perfect title for the first game: it’s a mystery of sorts, and takes
place in a metaphorical fog which slowly evaporates to reveal the hidden
truths. In *End of Ages*, the fog remains.

I feel bad treating this game as harshly as I have. It’s not terrible,
really: it has flaws, but nothing that completely destroys the
experience. Like *Uru*, it’s little more than a bunch of Ages to
explore, and unlike *Uru*, it does at least try to have a story,
characters, and a greater degree of interactivity. The thing that makes
this game so disappointing is that it’s the end, and the end could have,
and should have, been a lot better. Considered as *Uru II*, it’s a
worthy and satisfactory installment. As the culmination of the series,
it just tends to pale in comparison to earlier installments. It lacks
the sharp, original storytelling and atmosphere of *Myst*. It’s not
sweeping and realistic like *Riven. *It doesn’t have a strong central
character like *Exile*, or vivid, dynamic Ages like *Revelation*. Even
*Uru* generally outperforms it in terms of the expansiveness of its
environments. The game’s greatest problem, sadly, is not an innate one
but one of comparison. Like a child who can’t live up to the standard
set by talented siblings, *End of Ages* just tends to seem sort of
neglected. Cyan Worlds collapsed at about the same time it was released,
and there’s definitely a sense that creating the game was a rush against
time, just trying to get *something* out the door before all the money
was gone. As such, its cobbled-together quality is perhaps to be
expected. Is *End of Ages* a bad game? No. It’s troubled, but not bad,
when all is said and done. It’s just that in a perfect world, it would
have been something much different.