---
title: Myst
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/myst/
layout: myst
---

> "You have just stumbled upon a most intriguing book, a book titled Myst." - Introduction to the *Myst* game manual

![Illustration of the Mechanical Age of Myst by Ivy Allie](/assets/images/myst/01-myst.jpg)

*Myst* is unique. It was a game that carved out a niche all its own; it
was groundbreaking at the time of its release in 1993 and even thirty
years later there are few titles that have successfully emulated its
formula. Not to imply that it's perfect; in fact, it's very uneven
overall. It's a strange blend of the macabre alongside the whimsical,
nonsensical design choices butting up against logic puzzles, and
imaginative visuals stymied by the limitations of technology. But there
is a reason that *Myst* sold six million copies and went on to spawn an
entire series: despite its shortcomings, *Myst* was genuinely good.

Described in the simplest possible terms, *Myst* is a game about
exploration. You have arrived in a strange place. What do you do?
Naturally, you begin to look around. The game is your camera, your
window. The cursor is your hand. The music is your intuition. The game
involves no role-playing: rather, it turns your computer into a gateway
through which *you* can enter another universe.

In many ways, *Myst* was an exemplar of the concept of "multimedia" that
was prevalent throughout the 90s. The CD-ROM, capable of holding over
600 megabytes of information, was at the forefront of this. Even for the
few people who had Internet access in the early 90s, it wasn't practical
for transferring anything other than text and some very simple graphics.
But a CD-ROM could contain much more: not just images but video and
audio clips as well. The most immediate application of this concept was
in educational products, such as Microsoft's Encarta encyclopedia, which
shipped with a wide selection of articles, images, and video clips.
*Myst*'s creators, the game studio Cyan, were also among the earliest
adopters of the CD-ROM for educational purposes, their earliest releases
being games for children. *Myst* was a natural evolution of the concept,
using the principles and technologies of multimedia to build not a
learning tool for children but an experience for adults.\*

\**Myst* has also been called the "killer app" that drove sales of
CD-ROM drives on a wide scale: you didn't need a CD-ROM drive for your
productivity software yet, but you did need one if you wanted to try out
this popular new game. 
{: .aside }

*Myst* was also part of another largely forgotten trend in video games,
the "interactive movie" or "full-motion video (FMV) game." These used
realistic graphics and (often) live-action footage to create a game that
felt more closely related to film than to the arcade. Early examples had
been distributed on Laserdiscs, and *Myst*, along with contemporaneous
titles like *Phantasmagoria* and *The Seventh Guest*, brought the
phenomenon to the CD-ROM and by extension the personal computer. *Myst*
was not billed as an interactive movie, but nevertheless wears its
cinematic influences on its sleeve, displaying its imagery between black
bars like a letterboxed film, and rolling credits not only during its
intro but every time the game quits. And it utilizes live action as
well, its characters portrayed by none other than Cyan's founders, the
brothers Rand and Robyn Miller.

The game's control scheme is one that's instantly intuitive to anyone
who's used a mouse. The world is seen through a series of static
"shots", and you click to move through the world or interact with
objects. If you want to walk further up a path, you click the path. If
you want to turn right, click on the right edge of the screen. If you
want to pull a lever, click the lever. *Myst*'s frame-by-frame
presentation has been derided as a "slideshow" in the years since, but
it's important to acknowledge how unobtrusive this setup is. The static
framing of the scenery may be less immersive than the 360-degree views
afforded by some of the later games, but they're also less disorienting,
in part because this method enabled the game's creators to carefully
compose every shot to make it clear what you can or can't do, what is or
is not important. The mechanics of playing *Myst* are so obvious and
easy to understand that in the first edition of this book I forgot to
even *mention* them.

*Myst* opens with a short cutscene: a man is seen falling into a glowing
chasm, a book in his hands. He suddenly vanishes, but the book continues
falling. You watch as it tumbles through a field of stars and listen to
the man's voiceover narration: "I realized \[\...\] the book would not
be destroyed as I had planned," he says. "Questions about whose hands
might one day hold my Myst book are unsettling to me." His monologue
ends with the words "the ending has not yet been written," spoken as you
see the Myst book land on the ground. It is an efficient and effective
opening: it alludes to a mysterious backstory, touches on the question
of who might find the book, then reaches out to the player and
indicates: *You. You're the one who finds it.*

After picking up the Myst book, you are transported ("Linked", to use
the in-universe terminology) to Myst Island, which will be the central
hub of your explorations. The island is essentially a junction that
holds the rest of the game together. It is here that you will learn the
backstory by reading journals, interact with the game's characters, and
solve puzzles in order to gain access to the game's other environments
("Ages").

Though Myst Island has become iconic, its design is less coherent than
anything else in this first installment. Its jumble of unrelated objects
and lack of standard living facilities make it feel more like a
mini-golf course than a functional environment. Creating believable
worlds is always a tall order, and one which this series generally
succeeds at fairly well, but its most familiar location falls somewhat
short of the goal.

The Library on Myst Island is the game's primary repository of story
content, which comes in the form of journals. There is one for each of
the Ages, and they take the form of travelogues. The author describes
something called The Art, a method by which he is able to travel to
other worlds by writing about them in special "Linking Books." While the
author's name is not revealed within the journals, you can infer that it
is Atrus, a name you learn from a note that is among the first things
you find on Myst Island. The journals also discuss his sons, Sirrus and
Achenar, and his wife, Catherine.

In addition to establishing the principal characters, the journals also
construct a mental image of the Ages for the player. This means that
when you finally visit an Age after reading about it, you not only
experience a feeling of familiarity, but also are strongly cognizant of
certain disconnects between the worlds described in the books and the
worlds as they are in the game's present. The historical accounts paint
them as vibrant and inhabited, but what you find will instead be barren
and lifeless. It's definitely the same place you read about, but
something has gone horribly wrong. In this way, the game plays words and
images against each other to form a larger narrative within the player's
head.

Elsewhere in the Library, the player will also encounter Sirrus and
Achenar, who have somehow become trapped in a pair of Linking Books,
through which the player can see and hear them. They are blurry and
distant at first, and they plead with you to find red and blue pages
that will set them free. They each claim to be innocent of wrongdoing
while implicating the other. With every page retrieved, the brothers'
"signal strength" improves, enabling them to speak more clearly.

The game's central question, which the player must answer, is which of
the brothers is telling the truth -- assuming either of them are. While
you likely need no coaxing to explore the game's environments, this
setup establishes the narrative that you'll be playing in the game's
"present day." To learn the brothers' stories, you must find as many red
and blue pages as possible, which you can only do by visiting the Ages.

Each Age has a corresponding puzzle on Myst Island which, when solved,
grants you access to a new Linking Book. These puzzles are designed in
such a way that they cannot be solved without first finding relevant
clues from the journals, which prevents the player from arriving in the
Age without first being acquainted with its backstory.

All of the Ages follow the same structure: you must solve a series of
puzzles in order to find the red and blue pages, then you must solve a
second series of puzzles in order to return to Myst Island. While
searching the Ages, you will also discover clues that reveal the events
of the past. The lively places described in Atrus's journals have become
cold and lifeless, and are littered with evidence of the brothers'
wrongdoings. It is through this ephemera that the player learns the
truth about Sirrus and Achenar: that both have committed heinous crimes
and neither deserve to be released.

Yet none of the pertinent details are revealed through exposition. The
story of the brothers' conquests is told entirely by their castoff
possessions. Achenar's spaces are filled with macabre trophies,
instruments of torture, and weapons. Sirrus's are filled with gold,
jewels, finery, and drugs. While these signs are hardly subtle, the way
in which they convey the truth about the brothers was groundbreaking.
The game's creators trust you to put the pieces together without
hand-holding. Twenty years after *Myst*, *Gone Home* would be praised by
critics for its use of environment as a storytelling device, but it
still utilized extensive voiceover narration, not trusting the visuals
to convey their story without help. *Myst* proves that this can be done.

*Myst* includes four separate Ages (not counting Myst Island). Compared
to what you'll see in later games, *Myst*'s Ages are relatively small
(in part due to technical limitations), but each one is varied enough to
give the sensation that there's something interesting around every bend.
Much of this is conveyed through the visuals, which still hold up fairly
well overall. The images are richly detailed and believable. The
textures especially have a veracity to them which was absent from most
of *Myst*'s contemporaries and imitators. A great deal of care was taken
in the rendering of most foreground objects, so the environments feel
very rich despite a relative lack of detail in the terrain.

Sound contributes to the atmosphere as well. Evocative ambient noises
are employed throughout the game: dripping water echoes through a dark
tunnel, birdsong and creaking timber drift through the walls of an
abandoned treehouse. But music is even more important, setting the mood
for a space even before you begin to explore it.

Each of the Ages is significant, so we'll look at each in turn,
beginning with the smallest, Mechanical. The Mechanical Age consists
only of a small fortress and two tiny islands. Diminutive as it is, it
clearly demonstrates the principles by which *Myst* conveys its story.
From the journals we learn that the inhabitants of the Mechanical Age
were besieged by pirates, and that Atrus helped them fight back by
constructing a special stronghold. When the player arrives, though, the
fortress is abandoned, and littered with clues that suggest Sirrus and
Achenar reversed its function and used it to attack the inhabitants. The
fortress is littered with plunder, and a makeshift torture chamber has
been constructed inside its walls. It's the game's most straightforward
interpretation of its formula.

The expansive Channelwood Age represents the opposite end of the
spectrum, and highlights a theme that would recur frequently throughout
the series: the relationship between exploration and conquest. This
often manifests as a stereotypical situation involving technologically
"advanced" explorers encountering relatively primitive natives.
Channelwood marks the first appearance of this theme: Atrus describes
the natives as "monkey-like people\'\' and states that they seem to
worship him as some sort of deity. He's uncomfortable with this, being a
conscience-driven and secular person, and warns the young Sirrus and
Achenar not to take advantage of the natives' respect. But predictably,
the reverence demonstrated by the Channelwood natives proved too
enticing for the budding psychopathy of the brothers: in the game's
present day, the natives' homes stand vacant, and a sacrificial temple
with an altar to Achenar has been constructed in the treetops.

The Age itself is a maze of treehouses and boardwalks, which can be
confusing to navigate, but it's visually appealing and it feels very
expansive. Where most of the other Ages are limited to a small cluster
of rooms, Channelwood is a sprawling web of bridges and treehouses that
take a while to explore. Channelwood set a precedent; Ages in later
games would all be expected to measure up to its example.

Stoneship is another small Age, only marginally larger than Mechanical,
but it has a number of visually distinct areas which make it seem bigger
than it actually is. Sirrus and Achenar both have elaborate
"bedrooms\'\' which don't have much in common with the rest of the Age
in terms of overall aesthetics, but well reflect their personalities:
Sirrus's is decked out in palatial opulence and Achenar's looks like the
chamber of an evil wizard. Other landmarks include a ship (sunken but
perfectly preserved), a lighthouse, a mountain top overlook, and an
underwater tunnel. Where in most of the other Ages the various sub-areas
stay fairly close to the overall "look," those in Stoneship tend to
stray away from the rocky, windworn look we see elsewhere in the Age.

Perhaps the strangest Age is Selenitic: it consists of a relatively
large island, mostly featureless but with a few different areas and
buildings scattered across it more or less randomly. There's a clock
tower, a geothermal power station, a "forest" of harmonious crystals,
and so on, but their existence and placement seem practically random.
Furthermore, since the Age was never inhabited and has no valuable
plunder, it was of no interest to Sirrus and Achenar, and thus we learn
nothing about them here. For that reason the Age has practically no
story content. There's nothing to do here but to find the pages and
solve the notoriously frustrating Mazerunner puzzle in order to return
to Myst.

But while it lacks story, Selenitic does have a distinct central theme:
sound. Nearly all of the Age's puzzles involve sound of some sort:
gaining access to the Mazerunner requires a sequence of sounds collected
from around the island, and the Selenitic Book itself has a musical lock
(which unintentionally protects it from tone-deaf travelers). *Myst*, as
mentioned previously, was a product of the "multimedia" era, and its
marriage of realistic graphics with atmospheric sound design was one of
its selling points, but Selenitic was one of very few parts of the game,
and even the series overall, that made sound the focus of the gameplay.
In a way, it now feels like an artifact of the time when the game was
being created; one of the many aspects of its design that were
experimental. And while it did not ultimately prove to be one of
*Myst*'s more influential innovations, it was an interesting change of
pace for the game.

If *Myst*'s primary strengths are its atmosphere and story, its primary
weakness is its gameplay, especially its puzzles. The puzzles have
always been an area of contention among players; some people really like
them and others find them to be little more than a necessary evil.

But *are* puzzles truly necessary? Most of *Myst*'s puzzles are poorly
integrated in terms of plausibility. In-universe they are generally
explained as complicated locks meant to protect Linking Books from
strangers, but puzzles are not effective locks, especially not when
clues are left lying around. As a result the puzzles begin to feel
contrived, clearly meant to slow down and/or gratify the player rather
than to provide any plausible function. This may be why the game has
become widely remembered as "that game with the annoying puzzles." The
puzzles *are* annoying, they are obtuse and obviously irrelevant to the
environment they exist in.

Most of *Myst*'s puzzles require a "pen and paper" approach. These are
puzzles that expect you, the player, to keep notes on the things you
find during your explorations, or even to keep full-on journals as Atrus
did. Some versions of the game shipped with a blank notebook in the box.
(And many players took this invitation very seriously -- in years past,
"player journals" documenting one's gameplay experience were a staple of
fan message boards.) *Myst*'s puzzles require you to write down scraps
of information and draw diagrams. The game is generous with its hints,
but you must document them yourself, or physically return to the place
where you found them if you need to see them again. This is a style of
game design that has since fallen out of favor, but in a way it's
distinctly of an era: *Myst* was a game one would play at a desk in a
home office, a space where pens and paper were close to hand already.

But putting aside the more overt logic puzzles, let's return to the more
subtle psychological puzzle that forms the core of the game's story. You
have visited all four Ages and seen the evidence of the brothers'
wrongdoings. You have collected the red and blue pages and heard the
brothers' version of events. Now they explain to you how to find the
final pages, the ones that have the power to set them free.

This leads you into the first instance of a recurring trope that I call
the Final Big Choice. By this point, you've seen enough to realize that
despite their protestations, both brothers are guilty. The question of
which brother should be released has been answered: neither of them,
probably. But there's one final catch: alongside the final pages there's
another book. Both of the brothers insist the book must be left alone,
claiming that if you touch it, you'll be trapped in it as they are. This
is the Final Big Choice: you can either choose to release one of the
brothers, or you can choose not to believe them and investigate the
forbidden book. Again the game's creators have placed their trust in
you, the player. You know the brothers are liars, and you can infer that
their insistence that you not touch the book probably indicates that you
should, even though you don't know what the book will do. The Final Big
Choice became a defining moment for the series, one which would be
emulated by *Exile*, *Revelation, *and *End of Ages*. 

So you pick up the forbidden book, and come face to face, finally, with
Atrus. He tells you his own version of events, the only one that lines
up with all the evidence you've seen along the way: the brothers trapped
Atrus in order to gain control of his library, before ultimately
becoming entrapped in the prison books themselves. Now Atrus needs the
player's help to be set free from his own prison and bring his sons to
justice. (Hypothetically you could choose to disbelieve Atrus and free
one of the brothers instead, although I doubt anyone would.) Once freed,
Atrus links back to Myst and destroys the prison books with the brothers
still inside them.

When Atrus returns to the player, he thanks you for your help and
apologetically offers, as a reward, permission to continue exploring his
Ages. It's a definite anticlimax, an ending with little closure and
nothing gained except Atrus's blessing. That said, I think this lack of
an ending is actually intentional, and is meant to be taken as an
invitation to continue revisiting the Ages despite the narrative being
complete. As Atrus says: "feel free to explore, at your leisure. And I
hope you find those explorations satisfying." Most people expect
closure, so as a storytelling tactic this does seem awkward at best, but
still there's something charming about it. It's another experiment in a
game filled with experiments.

*Myst* is a remarkable experience, and an incredibly confident artistic
statement on the part of its creators, who seem to have known exactly
what they were making despite it being unlike anything that had come
before it. *Myst* is a story built up from disparate elements (visual,
textual, acoustic, and musical), which form into a complete picture
inside the player's head. It set the standard that its sequels (and
imitators) would follow, to varying degrees of success. It brought to
the nascent CD-ROM format, and the multimedia era, a memorable tale told
through vibrant graphics, memorable characters, and evocative sounds.

It was, above all, an adventure.
