---
title: Uru&colon; The Path of the Shell
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/pots/
layout: myst
---

![The Fourth Sphere of Ahnonay](/assets/images/myst/10-uru3.jpg)

On many occasions I’ve mentioned *Myst* to avid video game enthusiasts
and seen the same reaction: their eyes glaze over and they say that they
thought it was boring. The way the *Myst* series tells its stories is
rather unorthodox, to the point of being inaccessible to many newcomers.
In the end, though, it’s the story that makes the game work. The desire
to find out what happened is what pushes players to solve the puzzles.
*Uru*, on the other hand, has an understated narrative that makes the
game feel somewhat empty even to invested players. This final
installment, sadly, does nothing to correct that precedent, and
unfortunately compounds it with an almost complete lack of storyline and
some of the most tedious and repetitive puzzles ever devised. *Uru: The
Path of the Shell* is not without its charms, but the inescapable fact
is that it is, in all honesty, pretty boring.

Much of the game revolves around the prophecies of a D’ni mystic known
only as The Watcher. Specifically, the Watcher prophesied the coming of
a messiah figure known as the Grower, who would lead the D’ni into a new
era. Over the course of the game we come to learn that Guildmaster
Kadish (the greedy guy who owned Kadish Tolesa), created an elaborate
hoax to trick people into thinking the he was himself the Grower. Who is
the *real* grower, you ask? Yeesha, of course! This is where things
begin to go wrong.

Here’s the problem: When this series got started, it presented players
with a universe in which there was exactly one form of magic: the Art.
The series used that as a mechanic to travel to other worlds. These
worlds, while often bizarre and surrealistic, abided by the laws of the
overall universe, which means (for example) that you’ll never find an
Age in which the laws of physics work differently. The characters of
*Myst* lead lives that are very different from our own, which presents
many unique storytelling opportunities. We’re attracted to the *Myst*
storyline for two reasons: 1. We want to visit these strange and
wonderful worlds, and 2. We want to learn the stories of people who live
in them. These characters can do something we can’t, and we want to know
what they decide to do with that ability. That’s all we need to be
hooked. Adding more magical things to the universe serves only to make
it less credible, especially since characters in earlier installments
seemed *completely unaware* that their universe contained such
things.

We’ve accepted a few new forms of magic up to this point because they’re
at least related to the magic we had before: the Journey cloths, the
Relto book, and even the *bahro* are at least marginally connected to
the Art. Prophecy is another matter entirely. To prophesy is to see the
future. To see the future is to establish a universe in which pretty
much anything is possible, because it becomes possible to know anything.
Introducing prophecy where it did not previously exist implies that your
universe no longer follows any rules at all.

This is not even to mention the actual content of the prophecy: that
Yeesha is the Chosen One. The concept of a Chosen One, a character who
is uniquely and often supernaturally qualified to fulfill a specific
destiny, is so overused in fiction that it has probably become one of
the most well-known of all tropes. As such it’s a difficult concept to
use well, as we’ve seen it a million times before, and *Uru* does
nothing original with it. We’re told that Yeesha alone can lead the D’ni
to some unspecified future, and that’s about it. Her destiny, whatever
it is, subverts all the conventions we’ve come to care about, and since
we hardly know her as a character at all, there’s not really any reason
to care about what takes place here. All of *Uru*’s storytelling
problems converge at this point: we don’t know the characters, we often
don’t like what they’re doing, but we’re told that what they’re doing is
right.

This, to me, was the moment that the series jumped the shark.

But on to the game itself. At the outset of *The Path of the Shell*, we
have access to two new Ages: Er’cana and Ahnonay. There’s a handy DRC
exposition notebook (the last of its kind, alas) which explains that
Kadish was intimately involved with both Ages. Er’cana was an
agricultural Age for which he designed a good deal of machinery, and
Ahnonay was a special Age in which Kadish demonstrated his magical
time-travel abilities, which are apparently one of the Grower’s many
talents. (The DRC journal remains agnostic as to the validity of these
claims.)

But Kadish is dead, and the DRC has moved on. Yeesha will not be joining
us. We will make this journey alone, without encountering any other
characters. This is by far *Myst*’s loneliest chapter.

Moving on to the two primary Ages, let’s take a look at Er’cana. To its
credit, one thing that *Path of the Shell* does do very well in general
is its striking visuals, and Er’cana is among most dramatic environments
in all of *Uru*. We arrive at the bottom of a narrow, sandy crevasse
with smooth windswept walls, and gradually make our way out into a wider
canyon which leads up to Er’cana’s industrial facility. This initial
area is vast and starkly beautiful, a quiet and lonely landscape which
has largely returned to the wild, and in that sense is somewhat
reminiscent of Teledahn. The atmosphere is somewhat different inside the
industrial complex, which is filled with a lot of noisy and very
impersonal machinery. This is where Er’cana really diverges from
Teledahn: both are functional landscapes, partially reclaimed by nature,
but where Teledahn has a very distinct sense of history and Sharper’s
personal perspective, most of Er’cana is just machinery. The puzzles
here are fairly straightforward; most involve activating or deactivating
various things in order to clear a path through the factory. The
ultimate goal here is to manufacture a batch of large pellets which
create light when submerged in water. These are needed later on to
illuminate a cave containing an important clue, marking the second time
in *Uru* in which we have to rely on awkward sources of illumination in
order to see something in the dark. Of course, we’re not told why we
need to make these things at first, so the only reason we know to solve
the puzzles is that there’s simply nothing else to do. As in the rest of
this game, there’s pretty much no story content here, which makes the
explorations somewhat hollow despite the nice visuals.

Ahnonay is something entirely different. As mentioned earlier, Kadish
designed Ahnonay as a place where he could demonstrate his ability to
time-travel. As we explore the Age, we see this effect come into play as
well: what starts out as a tropical island suddenly becomes a stormy
wasteland, and then just as suddenly seems to be floating through the
void of space. We ultimately learn that the landscape we see is actually
a fake, its four variants contained in separate little bubbles which can
be rotated into place before link-in to give the illusion that the Age
is changing. Kadish, supposedly, constructed this entire device in order
to fool people into thinking he could travel through time, a process
which involved walking around the perimeter of the Age, linking out,
then linking back in to find it miraculously altered. As a magic trick
it’s decent, but that Kadish could actually portray this as an authentic
phenomenon seems somewhat hard to believe. The areas are small enough
that even the most rudimentary exploration would give away the secret
(for example, from many angles one can easily tell that the “horizon” is
only a few hundred feet away) and the fake continuity seems highly
implausible, particularly the space variant (even disregarding how the
island could end up in space to begin with, why is there air and
gravity?). Though both Yeesha and the DRC claim that Kadish styled
himself as the Grower, I suspect that his show was tongue-in-cheek at
best, and that he was more interested in showmanship and attention than
the fulfillment of prophecies. As a hoax Ahnonay is difficult to take
seriously, but as the most complicated and expensive magic trick in the
history of the universe, it makes a perverted kind of sense.

As for Ahnonay’s puzzles, they are some of the most tedious and
repetitive tasks ever brought to the video game medium. The marker hunt
in *To D’ni* at least allows you to visit new places as you search, but
Ahnonay’s puzzles tend to involve doing the same things over and over
again…and that’s if you’re following a walkthrough. If you’re actually
trying to *solve* them, it will be much, much worse. The first task we
encounter in the Age is to chase all the crablike “quab” creatures off
of the island, a process which is cute once or twice but quickly becomes
tiresome once you realize that you’re going to have to repeat it twenty
or so times. (Another problem with the quab puzzle is that the quabs are
really cute and I would have preferred to let them stay on the island.)
Once that’s accomplished, you must shatter lots of crystals. From there
on it’s a series of manipulations involving touching Journey Cloths at
the correct intervals and swimming back and forth over lengthy distances
in order to pull levers in sequence. All of this must also be punctuated
by frequent linking in and out of the Age, with requisite loading
screens. And since none of this is spelled out explicitly, solving the
Age depends entirely on trial and error. *Lots* of trial and error.
Playing Ahnonay with a walkthrough is tedious and repetitive, but
playing it without one is a trial of patience which even a seasoned Zen
master would find punishing.

A recurrent theme in *Path of the Shell* is that of the passage of time,
a concept which is frequently integrated into the puzzles. It’s an
interesting idea, and one with a lot of potential, but very difficult to
do in a way that would be both enjoyable and interesting. In the case of
this game, the temporal aspect of the puzzles primarily involves
waiting. In total, players will spend a total of forty-five minutes of
real-world time simply waiting for things to happen in the game,
*assuming* that the puzzles were solved correctly. (In the event that
you’ve made a mistake, some of these waiting periods will need to be
repeated.) The aforementioned forty-five minutes are broken up into
three different puzzles. One is a process which takes fifteen minutes to
complete, and in the interim you are free to do whatever you like. The
second requires you to wait in a cave for fifteen minutes, but you’re
allowed to wander around the cave while you wait. The third and most
notorious is one in which standing still for fifteen minutes *is the
solution*. I am open to games which integrate unusual mechanics and
unorthodox puzzle solutions, but there’s something truly absurd about a
game in which the solution to the puzzle is to leave your computer while
the puzzle solves itself. (About half of my notes for this chapter were
prepared during this period.) Something to do, even something stupid and
pointless, would be more interesting than standing around doing nothing.

The game’s final act is somewhat perplexing experience. After finding
and walking the ultimate Path of the Shell (which in this case is a
simple labyrinth drawn on the floor), the player suddenly links into the
familiar false fireplace in the Myst Island library. The library has
been gutted and the door is securely shut, so the rest of the island is
inaccessible, but the “you” character is now “really” on Myst Island, a
location which the “you” character previously visited only in a video
game. The weird effect of the “you-are-you” conceit somehow makes this
seem like a stunning development, despite the fact that we’re just
seeing a scene from one game inside a different game. There’s nothing
wrong with that; it is in fact quite exciting, but you feel kind of dumb
if you ask yourself *why* you find it exciting.

Of course, when there’s a fireplace in a *Myst* game, you know you’re
going to have to enter a grid code, and this is no exception. After
entering a code gleaned piece-by-piece throughout the game, the
fireplace spins around to grant access to the K’veer book from the first
game. Upon linking to K’veer, a loud Yeesha voiceover cuts in. (And it
*is* loud. In fact, it turns the game volume back up to maximum if
you’ve changed it.) She declares herself the Grower, proclaims the
Grower’s destiny as master of both time and space, and derides Kadish
for claiming such powers. She also states that she’s liberated Kadish’s
bones from his vault. Once her little speech is over we return to
K’veer. There’s not a lot to see here, but Yeesha does leave a message
for Atrus in which she tells him that thanks to her new destiny, his
“burden is lifted.” This seems to represent a sort of passing of the
torch from father to daughter, and is a fairly nice character moment.
(Personally, though, I place more trust in Atrus’s reluctant but
levelheaded stewardship than Yeesha’s inscrutable powers and
questionable sanity.) Yeesha generally comes across as spiteful and
dismissive of anything having to do with her father, so it’s refreshing
to see that she actually does care about him.

All this brings the game to a somewhat overbearing and perplexing
conclusion. We’re still not really sure what The Grower is supposed to
do or what, exactly, her powers entail. And yet it does bring a degree
of closure to the *Uru* storyline, which in the end seems to be a story
about Yeesha’s struggle to transcend the worldly remains of D’ni to
become a demigod. (The wisdom of including such a transformation in the
story is somewhat beyond the point now.)

There’s one more hidden ending, here, though: naturally we have to go
see if Yeesha was telling the truth about Kadish’s bones, so it’s time
to revisit Kadish Tolesa. But in the vault nothing appears to have
changed. The skeleton is as we left it and the room is still piled high
with bags of cash, carpets, and paintings of Teledahn. The inquisitive
player, however, will eventually find a small linking book hidden in the
corner. It links to an alternative version of the vault which is largely
empty and which does not include Kadish’s bones. In the new vault we
hear the musical theme of the Great Tree of Possibilities (D’ni’s
metaphor for the infinite nature of the Art) and find various scraps
which imply that Yeesha traveled back in time and rescued Kadish from
his fate. It’s a strange ending, and leaves a lot of questions
unanswered (exactly why did Yeesha save him when she’s always
badmouthing him?), but in its own understated way it’s very nice. *Uru*
in general spends a lot of time beating you over the head with what
you’re supposed to think, so it’s refreshing, for once, to be told
nothing and left to form your own conclusions.