---
title: Revelation
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
permalink: /myst/revelation/
layout: myst
---


![The Lakehouse in Haven](/assets/images/myst/06-revelation.jpg)

When *Myst IV: Revelation* is good, it’s great. It wildly exceeds one’s
expectations with exceptional visuals, clever storytelling, and
originality. But when it’s bad, it’s *terrible*. *Revelation* largely
improves upon *Exile*’s mistakes, but it fails to emulate *Exile*’s
successes. This makes for a frustrating game: too flawed to be great,
but with too many good bits to be written off completely.

*Revelation*, like *Exile*, was contracted out to a new studio while
Cyan continued work on *Uru*. In this case, Ubisoft hand-picked a group
of creators specially for the purpose, dubbing it “Team Revelation.”

In terms of visuals and immersive effects the studio did admirably.
Using the aptly-named “ALIVE” game engine, *Revelation* seamlessly
merges prerendered images with attractive real-time effects for insects,
water, and so on, which creates a convincing and dynamic world. Another
extremely subtle but ingenious feature enables the player to lightly tap
on things to hear what they sound like, adding a layer of interactivity
to otherwise inert objects. This all works together to create an
engaging and believable game environment, one which feels more lifelike
than that of any other game in the series.

Sadly, this is all ripped asunder by the sheer ineptitude of the game in
other areas: the dialogue is terrible, the acting is abysmal, the
characters are shallow, and the plot ranges from implausible to absurd.
The structure and form of this game had a lot of potential, but sadly it
was squandered on incredibly weak content.

Before we move on, it’s also worth mentioning that *Revelation*’s
control system leaves a lot to be desired. It’s hard to get lost in a
game like *Riven* because each shot is carefully composed to make it
clear where the paths are going. Here the player is allowed to look in
any direction, which means that the game’s creators can’t control what
he sees, which invariably leads to disorientation. This was a problem in
*Exile* as well (particularly in Edanna) but it’s exacerbated here as
the nodes are fairly far apart: when one clicks to go forward, the next
node often bears very little resemblance to the preceding one. This
problem is particularly egregious in the Haven jungle, in which it’s often
literally impossible to distinguish between where one has been and where
one is going. Other control problems are caused by the sluggish mouse
movements, which make the game’s timed puzzles particularly difficult to
complete. The ALIVE system allows for some beautiful graphics, and I
salute it for that, but these technical limitations often fly in the
face of the believability which the engine is intended to cultivate.

The crux of the game is that Sirrus and Achenar did not die when Atrus
burned the Trap Books. This may be surprising and even nonsensical to
casual players, but within the *Myst* fan community, the nature of the
Trap Books was well-known already. Trap Books, as they are depicted in
*Myst* and *Riven*, are considered “non-canonical,” meaning that they
don’t exist in the “real world” of D’ni, but were simply made up as a
gameplay mechanic. Sources such as Cyan’s “D’ni historian,” Richard A.
“RAWA” Watson, stated that canonically speaking, Sirrus and Achenar were
imprisoned not in special Books but in inescapable Ages. Naturally this
led to some demand for a game which would involve Sirrus and Achenar’s
Prison Ages.

But showing the Prison Ages in a game directly contradicts the events of
the first game, especially for those players who have not followed these
convoluted canonicity issues. If there are no Trap Books, there can be
no Red and Blue Pages, and no way that the brothers could have
communicated with the player character. *Revelation* even bears this
out: the brothers do not recognize the player character, as if the
events of *Myst* never happened. The game does acknowledge that the
player has had some sort of prior experience with the brothers, but it
effectively erases from existence any of the things that the player
actually *did*. This is a phenomenon I call “canon fatigue:” a situation
in which there are so many contradictory “facts” that the continuity of
the storyline begins to crumble. This is problem is hardly unique to the
*Myst* series of course; examples can be found in most long-running
serial fictions. All that being said, though, canon fatigue issues are
not among this game’s foremost problems. *Revelation*’s treatment of the
trap books is consistent with itself, and only in the context of the
rest of the series does it seem problematic. In short, this isn’t really
*Revelation*’s problem, but rather is symptomatic of a series that’s
beginning to show its age.

The game opens with a Crazy Ride: the player is on a speedy tram with
Atrus’s daughter, Yeesha. In *Exile* Yeesha was only a baby; here she is
depicted as being perhaps ten years old, which shows that a significant
amount of time has elapsed since those events. Yeesha is depicted as a
precocious child: observant, talkative, and well-aware of her parents’
foibles. She’s played by Juliette Gosselin, whose acting skills exceed
those of most of the adult actors in this production. This intro is
direct and effective: it introduces Yeesha, establishes a timeframe, and
does so in an impressive environment.

At the end of the cutscene the player arrives at Tomanha, where Atrus
explains the problem: Catherine thinks that Sirrus and Achenar should be
set free. Atrus thinks otherwise and wants the player to offer an
objective opinion. In other words, the setup of the entire storyline is
that Atrus wants the player to settle a marital squabble for him. But
before the player can work on that, he needs to help Atrus calibrate a
doohickey, a puzzle so uniquely pointless that the game will actually
bypass it if the player steps away from it. Whether the player solves
the puzzle or not, Atrus’s equipment explodes, forcing him to run out
for replacement parts. Thus the player (as always) is left to stumble
through the ensuing events without any help.

Atrus himself doesn’t appear very much in this game, but it’s worth
noting that Rand Miller’s reprisal of the role is impressive. Atrus
greets the player character with seemingly genuine familiarity, and he
discusses his sons with a convincingly somber air. He’s the Atrus whom
the player has come to expect, friendly but with heavy issues on his
mind, and Miller captures him perfectly. It’s easily the strongest
performance in the game, which is pretty ironic considering that Miller
is the only member of the cast who is not a professional actor.

Before the game really gets going, the player has a chance to explore
Tomanha a bit. It’s a pleasant and engaging environment, and lulls the
player into a false sense of security, a sort of “quiet before the
storm.” Yeesha makes numerous appearances too, but each time the player
encounters her she’s doing something different, which frankly makes her
seem neurotic. This first Tomanha chapter continues until the player
solves a puzzle involving a needlessly complicated fusebox
(unfortunately not the only such puzzle), at which point the player is
knocked out by an explosion in a sudden cutscene.

When the player character comes to, it’s nighttime. He is apparently
unscathed despite the severe cranial trauma, but there’s no sign of
Yeesha. This being *Myst*, the first order of business it to explore
around to try to figure out what’s going on. Most of Tomanha appears
unscathed, but eventually the player discovers Yeesha’s necklace, a
magical object which was introduced earlier. Yeesha herself is not in
the vicinity, but touching the necklace triggers a flashback in which
she’s chased by an intruder.

The necklace introduces a clever new narrative device which allows the
player to look back in time and witness past events. To add a new
storytelling mechanic in this way was a clever move, though
unfortunately the necklace’s visions tend to be redundant. There are few
puzzles which depend on it, and most of the “memories” it reveals are
either irrelevant or are covered in greater depth elsewhere. While the
necklace could have been an extremely versatile storytelling tool, it
tends to abide by an understanding that it supplements rather than
complements the other elements of the game. It is in fact so marginal
that I suspect that it was conceived fairly late in the game’s design
process. The necklace could have been a truly groundbreaking, so it’s
disappointing that it instead ends up little more than a transmission
tool for bad acting.

After a few rudimentary puzzles, the player makes his way to the linking
chamber where the two Prison Books are waiting. At this juncture he is
offered the choice to first explore either Haven (Achenar’s prison) or
Spire (Sirrus’s prison). It doesn’t matter which Age one chooses, and in
fact it’s possible to return to the linking chamber and visit the other
at any time. We will look at both in turn.

Haven is a lush Age with a *Treasure Island* aesthetic. Environment
design is one of *Revelation*’s great strengths, in part because it goes
against the formula set in all the preceding games. All prior Ages (with
a couple minor exceptions) were islands surrounded by vast seas, but
none of *Revelation*’s Ages follow this convention. Only Haven feels
island-like, but in many shots the player can make out a huge land mass,
out of reach but enticingly real. Haven’s explorable area has a number
of distinct sectors: a damp and windswept beach (so beautifully realized
that you can almost smell the rotting fish), a number of subtly
different jungles, a swamp, and a meadow. Looking across the entire Age
from the raised promontory near the beginning is a truly astonishing
moment, a piece of living artwork like nothing I’ve seen in any other
game.

As the player explores the Age he retraces the story of Achenar’s exile.
Achenar began his stay on Haven by living in the massive shipwreck (a
callback to the Stoneship Age of *Myst*), and his effects within the
wreck speak to his motivations at the time: weapons, gruesome hunting
trophies, and a journal filled with conspiratorial plots, vicious anger,
and a blow-by-blow account of his conquest of the local wildlife. As
Achenar moved into the jungle, though, he began to develop a more
intimate understanding of the Age’s ecosystem. Of particular importance
are the “mangrees,” intelligent primates with which Achenar eventually
formed a close bond. In Achenar’s “lakehouse,” the player learns that
his time spent observing and interacting with the mangrees has brought
about a change in his character. Achenar has been remade by the Age, he
has to terms with his past and taken on a calling as the mangrees’
caretaker. Various necklace memories imply that he isn’t even
particularly eager to leave Haven, should doing so become an option. It
has become his home, and he’s not prepared to abandon it thoughtlessly.
That the player experiences Achenar’s journey chronologically is a
clever touch, and makes Haven one of the most memorable Ages in the
series.

Spire is likewise a rich and expansive Age, but Sirrus’s character is
more shallow than Achenar’s, so it is unable to convey the same sort of
character development. Spire is an Age like no other: the endless sea is
replaced with an infinite starfield, and the eponymous spires are in
fact asteroids floating through a vast cloudbank. It’s a hostile
environment, one barely capable of supporting human life. Its puzzles
are primarily involve power redirection and the resonant frequencies of
crystals: highly abstract fare that’s considerably less engaging than
Haven’s whimsical ecology. (Though to their credit, they do correspond
to Spire’s overall thematic elements.) Just as he did with Achenar, the
player follows Sirrus’s path through the Age, learning that the
inhospitality of the Age, along with his fury at being tricked by Atrus,
gradually caused Sirrus to develop a psychopathic vendetta. Sirrus spent
the first years of his exile fruitlessly searching for a Linking Book in
order to escape from Spire, as the player learns from his older
journals. Eventually Sirrus realized that no such book existed, which
only strengthened his desire for revenge. Despite the relatively
simplicity of his character, Sirrus’s reaction to his reunion with Atrus
is fairly nuanced, as described in his most-recent journal. In one
interesting moment, he quietly suggests repentance and a wish to be
allowed to return to Tomanha with past evils forgiven, but Atrus’s
resistance rekindles his anger and his journals leave off with a subtle
suggestion of his upcoming evil plan. While going insane would be an
understandable reaction to the cruel landscape of Spire, Sirrus isn’t
really written with enough sophistication for the player to get a sense
of his true emotions, or even to discern whether present-day Sirrus *is*
any different than past Sirrus. In fact, many of his schemes are such
harebrained nonsense that one is tempted to think his exile has made him
more stupid than nefarious. The player never really finds out what
Sirrus is really thinking, and for that reason Spire somewhat pales in
comparison to Haven. As an environment it’s beautifully realized, but
its story is lacking.

Both the Prison Ages suffer from a strange design fluke in that neither
of them have a clear goal for the player. In *Myst*, the objective in
each Age was clear: find a Page, then find the Myst book so that you can
return to the library. In *Exile*, the player must reach the end of each
Age to find a useful symbol. In both cases, there’s a clear indication
that the player has gained something and thereby “completed” the Age.
*Revelation*’s Prison Ages, on the other hand, indicate completion by
treating the player to short and largely uninteresting Crazy Rides. At
the end of each Age are clues which the player will need later on, but
they’re not apparently meaningful at the moment they’re found, and the
player doesn’t know from the outset that finding these clues is the
“objective.” The Crazy Rides aren’t even strictly necessary; the player
could walk back to the linking chamber and ultimately accomplish the
same thing. The game uses the rides to imply that the Age is complete,
rather than to provide any sort of contextual meaning that would confer
actual closure. The rides with which *Exile*’s Ages ended were directly
related to all the puzzles that the player had solved, and were the only
way to reach the places where Saavedro’s symbols were hidden. Here the
rides are treated as if they themselves are the motivating factor in
finishing an Age, as if *Revelation*’s creators were imitating the
format of *Exile* without actually understanding it.

Up until the end of the Prison Ages, *Revelation* is fairly strong.
There’s some poor dialogue and lots of bad acting, but nothing terrible
enough to ruin the experience. The Ages are rich and engaging, the music
impeccable, and the air of mystery perfected beautifully. The first time
I played it, I thought there was no way it could go wrong; I was already
drawing comparisons to *Riven* in my head and was prepared to declare it
one of the strongest entries in the series. Then I linked to Serenia.

Serenia: even its name is stupid. It’s an Age where certain kinds of
magic work, and conceptually there’s nothing wrong with that. The whole
concept of Linking is based on magic, after all, and we’ve seen
apparently magic things in Ages before, such as the levitating rocks of
Spire and the immaterial insects mentioned in *The Book of Atrus*. The
problem with Serenia is the way in which magic is approached. The Art is
magic in any practical sense, but it there is an understanding that it
is simply a technology like any other: something of incredible power
which might someday be explained by science, but is not currently
understood. Atrus, in his journal, attempts to find rational
explanations for the Serenian weirdness, but where in the past his
rationality was depicted as noble, here it’s cast as naive. No, the
player is assured, Serenian magic *is magic*, and trying to explore it
scientifically is futile. The player is simply not allowed to accept
Atrus’s logical approach to it, and *Myst* has always had logical
thought as a cornerstone.

Furthermore, Serenian magic is wildly inconsistent. The only Serenians
we meet are some sort of religious leaders, whose duties involve taking
trips into the psychedelic “Dream” world, from which they learn things
which are not apparent in the material world. From Dream they learn that
the player character will be visiting, approximately when he will
arrive, and what he looks like. They mention Dream and its supposed
usefulness at every opportunity. However, Dream is apparently highly
unreliable, failing to inform the Serenians of far more pressing
concerns. Of what use is a system which spends a huge amount of time
presaging a single harmless newcomer but fails to provide *any* clues
pertaining to the evils currently being perpetrated by Sirrus and
Achenar? If the Serenian mysticism is unable to alert even its top
priestesses to the existence of a dangerous plot going on within easy
walking distance, then their entire culture is built around a system
that is completely worthless. (Not to mention the fact that they must be
totally blind to not physically see Sirrus and Achenar running around,
since the player encounters them often.) It’s impossible to take Serenia
seriously for this reason: its mystical elements are out-of-place in the
series, and while we’re constantly informed that they’re wicked awesome,
in practice they appear to be only marginally more useful than
psychoactive drugs.

Even aside from Dream, the Serenian culture is at best ridiculous, and
at worst downright insulting. Much is made of the fact that Serenia is
some sort of matriarchy in which women are revered, but this apparent
attempt to distract feminist critics fails on a number of levels. What
the game’s creators have done here is to reverse expected gender roles,
but not only does this maintain a sexist power structure, it gives rise
to some unfortunate and regressive subtexts by accident. For example,
the player learns that the Serenian men do “hard stuff, like fixing
roofs.” The Serenian priesthood remains the sole domain of women, true,
but if the best career that Serenian women can aspire to is one in which
no physical prowess is required, that implies that they are still being
shielded from the “hard stuff” of their world. Furthermore, what do the
women who aren’t priestesses do? If men are handling all the “hard
stuff,” their career choices must be fairly limited. Playing with sexism
is like playing with fire: it always ends up hurting you in the end.

Gender issues aside, the Serenians also demonstrate a marked inability
to protect their own interests. Achenar steals a small stone sculpture
which, the player later learns, is actually some sort of magic thing
that their culture is dependent upon. So, is it irreplaceable? No, they
have teams out looking for a new one. Despite the fact that there are
more than one of these things, no one ever thought to keep a spare on
hand. And what of a Serenian police force? Sirrus and Achenar aren’t
hard to find; is there no one who can confront them, slap them in
chains, and take the magic thing back? For that matter, shouldn’t the
magic thing have been under guard in the first place? Whenever the
Serenians walk around wringing their hands and bemoaning their fates, I
can’t help but think that the whole situation could have been prevented
with a modicum of forethought.

All this being said, Serenia is not universally hated, and is in fact
quite popular with some people. The reasons for this disconnect are
particularly apparent in the sequence in which the player experiences
Dream firsthand. The transition from the real world to Dream is a music
video in which weird fairy-like things dance to the music of Peter
Gabriel (I’m not even kidding), then the player is dumped into a puzzle
in which he must brush against the souls of Serenian ancestors until
they all turn the same color. Some people really enjoy this puzzle,
finding it a refreshing and unusual diversion. Others find it
incongruous and frustrating. Both are fairly typical reactions to
Serenia in general. One’s enjoyment of the Age depends largely on one’s
tolerance for New-Agey spirituality. Nothing in Serenia is an inherently
bad idea, it’s just that the way the Age overall seems to have been
designed to be as unlike previous *Myst* installments as possible,
making it a polarizing experience by default. Some people will love it
and some people will hate it, but if the concept hadn’t been quite so
far removed from the player’s expectations, perhaps it would have been
enjoyable for everyone.

Once the player makes it through all the silliness (assuming he does,
which I’m sure many people have not), he’s forced to endure something
even stupider, namely The Plan… Sirrus’s plan! His diabolical scheme is
as follows: using Serenian technology, Sirrus will swap bodies with
Yeesha, use this “disguise” to learn the Art from Atrus, then kill
everyone and conquer the universe. In the previous chapter I wrote about
how Saavedro’s evil plan is nonsensical, but still makes sense from a
story perspective because Saavedro is irrational. Sirrus, however, is
generally depicted as insane *only insofar as he disregards human life*,
and is still very much a rational person otherwise. (This is, roughly,
the definition of psychopathy.) Yet Sirrus’s plan is far more ridiculous
than Saavedro’s. There are many ways he could accomplish the same ends
that are both less complicated and by extension less likely to fail.
Sirrus’s primary motivations are to escape Spire, get revenge against
Atrus, and to learn the Art. Escaping Spire is the easy part. There are
myriad ways he could get revenge against Atrus–even Saavedro knew how to
do it effectively. As for learning the Art, he could either go to D’ni
and teach it to himself, as Gehn did, or he could make up a new persona
for himself and trick one of the D’ni survivors into tutoring him. The
Yeesha plan, even disregarding the tiredness of body-snatching tropes,
has very little chance of succeeding, and as such isn’t very credible as
a Sirrus plan. It’s decidedly one of the low points of the entire
series.

From a gameplay perspective, the final act is somewhat weak as well.
Once we gain access to the room where the The Plan is being carried out,
we find Yeesha tied to the memory-transference chair. She says that
Achenar is going to kill everyone and that the player needs to set her
free immediately. Right on cue, Achenar shows up and says that Sirrus is
already possessing Yeesha’s body, and gives the player an order that
contradicts Yeesha’s. Yes, that’s right: it’s time for our usual Final
Big Choice: Who to trust, Achenar or Yeesha? Well, here’s what we know
so far:

1. Sirrus’s plan is to take over Yeesha’s body.
2. Sirrus’s plan has been going fairly well so far (incredibly enough).
3. The claim that Achenar is going to kill everyone spoken by
   Sirrus earlier.
4. Achenar has up to this point been both trustworthy and helpful.
5. The player has already seen Sirrus’s apparently-soulless body at
   this point.

If you decided to trust Achenar, then give yourself a pat on the back
for being conscious. The game does everything short of putting up a big
sign saying TRUST ACHENAR at this juncture, making the Final Big Choice
so phoned-in that it ends up calling attention to itself. There’s not
really much sense of accomplishment in being made to do something so
transparently obvious. The worst part is that this is the last moment of
the game where anything remotely *Myst*-like takes place. From here
onward it’s just two more unbearably tedious Dream puzzles before the
player finally gets to the ending cutscene.

The game ends like this: Sirrus’s soul is somehow preventing Yeesha’s
memories from returning to her body, and the Memory Chamber (which
powers the memory-transference chair) is dying, so there’s not a moment
to lose. Achenar buys some time by exposing himself to the Memory
Chamber’s lethal innards while the player solves some stupid puzzles.
The stupid puzzles kill Sirrus’s soul (although his body continues to
exist in a vegetative state…a fact which will never, ever be mentioned)
and release Yeesha’s memories back into her body. When the player is
done truckin’ in the trippy dreamworld sequence, he comes to and sees
Achenar die in Yeesha’s lap. It’s pretty depressing that the
already-redeemed Achenar has to redeem himself *again*, this time by
self-sacrifice, just because he got conned into working with Sirrus.
This is made even worse by the fact that the brothers *actually have
breathing kits* designed to protect against the Chamber’s poison gases,
but Achenar just didn’t use one for some unstated reason. The whole
scenario is reminiscent of *Exile*’s good-ending/better-ending system,
but alas: no matter what, Achenar dies, Sirrus survives as a vegetable,
and Yeesha is traumatized for life. Is it any wonder this is the only
game in the series that got a T rating?

The game closes out with yet another Atrus monologue. He thanks the
player for helping him yet again–yes, he *thanks* him, even though he
asked him to determine whether his sons should be released and instead
they both ended up dead. The more one reads into Atrus’s character the
less sense he makes: at this point three members of his immediate family
have tried to kill him, as has one former friend. His sons have been
instrumental in mass murder and are now both dead after traumatizing his
only daughter. Yet despite all this, Atrus just stands around musing as
if nothing is wrong. How much chaos needs to erupt in this man’s life in
order to get a rise out of him? That Atrus seems to be able to take any
amount of trauma and be unfazed doesn’t make him a stronger character.
It makes him a robot.

*Revelation* is not a perfect game by any means, and it falls somewhat
short of being a great game as well, mostly due to the unforgivable
weaknesses of its final act. That said, its immersive atmosphere is
impressive, and the shortcomings of its story and acting are largely
unnoticeable. Its main problem is that it’s a small story writ large.
Ultimately it’s a simple tale of four characters locked into a cycle of
mutual distrust and cruelty, but it’s presented like a summer
blockbuster complete with explosions, overacting, and an incredibly
melodramatic resolution. Had the game tried to be more intimate and less
cinematic, it could have struck gold.