---
title: The Book of Ti'ana
supertitle: Myst in Retrospect
layout: myst
permalink: /myst/tiana/
---

![Kerath&apos;s Arch, as seen in Uru](/assets/images/myst/07-tiana.jpg)

The *Myst* series can be divided into two distinct parts. The
installments we’ve examined so far make up what I call the “Atrus Arc,”
and follow the story of Atrus and his family. The second category, the
“D’ni Arc,” is focused instead on the D’ni civilization. *The Book of
Ti’ana* is the ideal entry point for the latter, as it is the only entry
in the series which takes place in D’ni during its heyday. This is the
backstory bible to rule them all, and sets the stage for the
D’ni-focused games that Cyan created after the completion of *Riven*.

The problem with the D’ni Arc in general is that it tends to focus more
on world-building than on character or plot, and as a result these
installments tend to be less successful than those of the Atrus Arc.
This is not to say that they are without merit, however: any longtime
fan will find a lot to enjoy in both *The Book of Ti’ana* and the games
which build upon it. The Atrus Arc’s stories took place within within a
specific universe, and the D’ni Arc, if nothing else, strengthens that
universe.

The book opens to a scene of D’ni stonecutters hard at work creating a
tunnel to the surface. This is a mission motivated by pure curiosity:
the D’ni arrived in the Cavern via the Art, so what lies beyond it is a
complete unknown. Most of the storyline at this point revolves around
the fact that the completion of the tunnel is dependent on the whims of
D’ni politics. This is largely a false sort of tension, as the reader
already knows from *The Book of Atrus* that the tunnel was eventually
completed, and as such the sixty-plus pages the book devotes to the
subject are often quite tedious.

Among the workers is Aitrus, grandfather of the Atrus-without-an-“i”
whom we know already. Aitrus is a young guildsman, brimming with
enthusiasm and and the thrill of discovery. Joining him on occasion is
Veovis, a lord from the Guild of Writers who seeks to befriend Aitrus
for reasons which are never fully explained. Eventually Aitrus rescues
Veovis after a tunnel collapse and their friendship is, for a time,
cemented.

At the end of the first act, the expedition somehow manages to drill
through all the red tape and complete their enterprise, but (much to
Aitrus’s disappointment) the government elects to seal off the tunnel
without ever using it. The D’ni are a xenophobic lot, and the
hypothetical existence of outsiders is enough to give them cold feet at
the last second. So despite the presumably colossal expense of building
the thing, the tunnel is sealed, abandoned, and left as a monument to
runaway government spending.

Much like the events it describes, this first act is a lengthy and
inconsistent thing. While it establishes two of the book’s primary
characters, much of what they do is humdrum routine. They make a tunnel,
they take some soundings, they make another tunnel. There is an accident
and some political fallout. Work is halted, work is resumed. In one of
its few breaks from this monotony we follow Aitrus on a solo expedition,
but his “adventure” is arguably even less interesting, since character
interaction, already pretty sparse, is rendered impossible. There’s no
story here, just a lot of tunneling and boring, and boring is boring.

In the next act we cut to the surface, where we meet the title
character, who at this point is called Anna. Anna lives in the desert
with her father, a mineral prospector who works for a pseudo-Arabic
lord. We follow them through daily routines for a while, then Anna’s
life is thrown into disarray when her father unexpectedly dies in his
sleep. Before striking out on her own, she decides to explore a tunnel
they discovered earlier, which naturally turns out to be the tunnel to
D’ni.

Anna manages to get all the way to the City itself, where she’s quickly
apprehended. The D’ni, distraught over this violation of their precious
secrecy, debate what to do with her: they won’t let her return to the
surface now that she knows of their existence, so the only choices are
to let her remain in D’ni or banish her to a Prison Age. Due to her
intelligence and apparent lack of ill intent, she’s allowed to stay and
is taken in by Aitrus’s family.

The story follows a predictable course from then on: Aitrus and Anna
become friends, Atrus reveals D’ni secrets to Anna (such as the
existence of the Art), they fall in love and decide to marry. The
relationship between Aitrus and Anna drives most of the conflict in the
book, as many of the D’ni (most notably Veovis) are staunchly opposed to
allowing Anna to participate in society, let alone marry into it. The
friendship between Aitrus and Veovis is ultimately destroyed by these
tensions, and he cuts off all contact with his former friend.

If it seems like I’m glossing over these events, it’s because they’re
honestly not that interesting. As in the opening, the characters are too
undefined to be very relatable, and much of the action follows a
structure that’s downright formulaic: Aitrus and Anna do something,
Veovis gets mad about it, repeat. Also, strangely, Veovis seems to be
the *only* person who cares much about what Aitrus and Anna do, despite
the fact that their conduct is scandalous enough that it necessitates
literal court hearings. This whole section is just the Aitrus Show,
(with special guest stars Anna and Veovis), and none of them are
particularly developed characters.

The relationship between Aitrus and Anna is not overly sentimental, but
neither is it that original. By their proximity the reader can predict
that they’re going to fall for each other, and the book never once tries
to make us think otherwise. There’s no dramatic development in their
relationship, no conflict between their personalities. Their only
problem is the disapproval of Veovis, and so the relationship isn’t so
much a story of a mutual character-building so much as it is of hero
vs. villain.

The third and final act details the events surrounding the Fall of D’ni,
in which Veovis plays a major part. Veovis, being the chief xenophobe in
a society of xenophobes, finds Aitrus and Anna’s marriage so
reprehensible that he becomes disenchanted with D’ni society itself. He
confides his feelings to his friend Suahrnir, a shady character who is
nonetheless a member of D’ni’s police force. Suahrnir is a weird
character, nurturing Veovis’s treacherous impulses for no perceptible
reason. The reader never learns anything about his background,
personality, or motivations. He remains a complete enigma, aiding and
abetting Veovis’s crimes at all turns while never venturing from the
shadows. In other parts of the series it is Veovis who is traditionally
held responsible for the Fall, but as depicted here he is little more
than a puppet for Suahrnir. This isn’t a bad thing, but given Suahrnir’s
pivotal role, it would have been nice to get a better sense of who he
is.

The final member of the triumverate of evil is Ae’garis, a former
guildsman and convicted criminal who writes fiery political screeds.
Ae’garis is bitter about his conviction (he maintains innocence) and
wants to see D’ni destroyed out of revenge. In this sense he’s developed
slightly more than Suahrnir, but he still comes across as little better
than a hollow vessel full of concentrated evil, driven by a desire for
revenge that exceeds all reason. The only detail we get about his
backstory is the fact that he carries a picture of a young woman in his
journal, presumably a lost lover/mother/sister/daughter/etc. This detail
humanizes him slightly, but does nothing to explain the depth of his
hatred. Ae’garis, like Suahrnir, is a potentially interesting character,
but his depiction is so vague that he never even makes sense, let alone
becomes relatable.

Our three villains thus join together and plot to destroy society for
reasons which are mostly unknown. Given how little we know about them,
the story isn’t really about the men who cause the end of the world so
much as it is about how they cause it, which is a crucial distinction.
The reader watches the villains do things, but doesn’t understand their
motivations or goals at all. It’s not unlike reading a journalist’s
account of an unfolding event, an random series of happenings without a
context that explains them. The villains simply commit a series of
crimes, culminating in a mass genocide in which they wipe out the D’ni
population by distributing a bioweapon through the ventilation system.
It’s a plot worthy of a James Bond megalomaniac or Batman archnemesis,
save for the fact that they pull it off successfully.

No discussion of the Fall, however, can be complete without
acknowledging Anna’s involvement. While the actual architects of the
Fall are our three supervillains, Anna is often held responsible for it,
especially by D’ni survivors. (See, for example, Esher’s comment in *End
of Ages*: “she killed us all.”) The reasoning behind this claim is
twofold: first, that by merely existing, Anna caused Veovis to become a
villain; and second, that she intervened to save Veovis’s life after he
was condemned to death for his crimes, thus enabling him to commit
genocide later. Anna being the title character, it is important that she
play a pivotal role in the events, but the way that her role is depicted
is troubling. As Anna’s presence ultimately *does* destroy D’ni society,
the dire predictions of the xenophobes are actually *validated*. That
the principal character should prove the “haters” right is a pretty
depressing subtext.

*The Book of Atrus* and *The Book of Ti’ana* together provide most of
the backstory of the series, but the two books are not equally readable.
While I would argue that *The Book of Atrus* succeeds in being a good
novel taken by itself (that is, outside of the context of the series),
*The Book of Ti’ana* does not. It suffers from clunky pacing, extraneous
subplots, and vague, undefined characters. *The Book of Atrus*‘s success
is in no small part due to the clear motivations of its primary
characters: Atrus wants to learn, and wants to return to Anna; Gehn
wants to resurrect D’ni and become lord of the universe; Catherine wants
to leave Riven and distance herself from Gehn; Anna wants to ensure that
Atrus is safe. Note especially the ways in which the characters’ desires
intersect and interfere with each other, which enables complex
interpersonal dynamics. These motivations affect their actions over the
course of the story, allowing character to drive the plot. As the
characters in *The Book of Ti’ana* don’t generally have strong
motivations, the plot cannot function in this manner. This is highly
unfortunate, because that’s what makes a novel engaging to read.

As the first installment of the D’ni Arc, *The Book of Ti’ana*
establishes many of the themes which will recur throughout the rest of
it. Of particular note are the concepts of pride and rebirth, which are
prominent in every part of the arc. These themes can likewise be
extended into two dichotomies: pride vs. humility and rebirth
vs. sacrifice.

Pride, and more particularly *hubris*, is generally depicted as the
primary contributing factor of D’ni’s downfall. The concept of hubris,
defined here as “presumption to challenge the gods,” is played very
deliberately throughout the book. The most explicit example of this can
be found in a passage near the beginning of *The Book of Ti’ana*, in
which Aitrus, admiring the consistent success of the massive tunneling
operation, muses that the D’ni are “godlike” in their defiance of nature
and adversity (pg. 42). The D’ni society is only protected from its own
hubris by the fact that it holds humility to be a great virtue. A person
who mistakes his godlike powers for literal godhood has, in their eyes,
committed “the ultimate heresy” (pg. 312). Thematically the series is in
agreement with the D’ni: all those who claim to be gods (such as Gehn
and the Terahnee) are eventually left with nothing.

Yet the D’ni arc depicts all of D’ni society as being fatally inflicted
with pride. While most of the D’ni are not so far gone as to believe
they are literal deities, they do fall prey to the concept that they as
a people are perfect. Thus their xenophobia: why deal with outsiders,
when their society is already the paragon of creation? This is
particularly noticeable in the chapters immediately following Anna’s
arrival, in which most of the D’ni imagine her to be little more than an
animal. The Fall, thematically, is more than a crime committed by a few
disgruntled men: it is divine justice, the fated end for those who are
blind to their own imperfections.

The Fall thus gives rise to the second dichotomy of rebirth and
sacrifice. Even as the citizens of D’ni die to atone for the sins of
their society, Anna and her son escape to “begin again” on the surface.
Her descendants, Atrus and Yeesha, will both be critical figures in the
reconstruction of post-Fall D’ni, working toward the rebirth that must
arise from the sacrifice that Anna wrought.

The theme of sacrifice vs. rebirth runs throughout the D’ni Arc,
particularly in the question of what to do with the ruins of the City.
Characters in the D’ni Arc can be easily divided between those who see
the city as an evil of the past (which should be left untouched, as a
warning to future generations) or as an unfortunate loss (which should
be restored). While it’s a question that’s open to discussion, the
series invariably sides with the former. The question central to the
D’ni Arc is whether the D’ni deserved to die, and surprisingly, the
answer it provides is a resolute *yes*.

All that being said, most *Myst* fans enjoy this book. One’s enjoyment
of a backstory-based work is proportional to one’s engagement in the
“frontstory.” A similar situation exists in J.R.R. Tolkien’s
Middle-Earth universe: its most familiar installments are *The Lord of
the Rings* and * The Hobbit*, both “frontstory” type works with
traditional storytelling techniques. But there’s also *The
Silmarillion*, a massive history book spanning numerous generations and
conquests. Casual fans, in general, can’t even begin to read it. Diehard
fans, on the other hand, can read it straight through and enjoy it.
Works of backstory cannot be universally appreciated because readers’
enjoyment is contingent on their desire to glean information about the
world in which the stories take place. *The Book of Ti’ana* may not be a
great novel, but as a work of backstory it holds up well.