---
title: Thesis Pitches
categories: [thesis]
layout: post
---

### Pitch No. 1: Acting Out

A group of unsuccessful actors and filmmakers in 1980s Los Angeles decide to pool their resources and produce their own children’s TV show. But the production is plagued with problems and quickly devolves into madness as an egomaniac puppeteer attempts a unilateral takeover. When larger corporate entities begin to take an interest, the characters are pushed to the brink.

The main character is Ramona, a would-be cinematographer who must balance her desire for creative fulfillment with the demands of her “real job” (which is in her chosen field but hardly fulfilling). At the beginning she has lapsed into a sort of complacency, but the events of the story will eventually twist her into something she never could have imagined. 

**What it’s really about:** The intersection of art, commerce, and personality, and the lengths a person will go to in order to succeed.

**Pros:** Full plot treatment has already been written and principal characters have been designed. 

**Cons:** Extensive visual and contextual research may be needed to create a believable environment, and thus far finding reference material has proved to be difficult.

**Rethinking It:** I still think this is a good, solid story, but I’m also kind of overwhelmed by it and I’m not sure if it’s what I really want to do right now.



### Pitch No. 2: Summer Homes

This is a story set in a coastal New England town with an economy largely based on summer tourism, but the action takes place during the winter, when the rich people are all gone and the remaining residents are the people who actually keep the town functioning. The narrative follows a large cast of characters through an early-season winter storm, with a particular focus on a group of children and teenagers. Over the course of the storm, one of the children dies in an accident, an event that reverberates across the community.

The story will be told in non-sequential order. The fate of the doomed kid will be established in a “flash-forward” on page 1, and from there onward we will see various events from the day of the storm from different perspectives at different times, gradually building up a complete picture of the event and the community from scattered pieces. The actual moment of the accident won’t be shown until the very end, or close to it. 

**What it’s really about:** The strange and nonspecific connections that define “community” in contemporary America, and how self-image relates to one’s environment.

**Pros:** The setting is inspired by Stonington, CT, where I lived for several years, which should reduce the amount of research that might be necessary otherwise. I have plenty of photographs from the time that can be used as reference material. Most of the characters have been defined in text form already. 

**Cons:** Exactly what happens in the story hasn’t been determined yet. I have some vague plot points in my head but nothing has been written down or solidified yet.

**Rethinking It:** I think the central premise of the kid dying in the accident is more dark than is necessary for this concept to work. It’s also probably the least interesting aspect of the whole thing, but by its nature would dominate the book’s emotional weight. Shifting it away from tragedy and more toward mundanity is probably the way to go.



### Pitch No. 3: Picture Day

Very loosely inspired by my experience working as a school photographer, this story would follow a group of characters (photographers, teachers, students, etc) whose lives briefly converge for the span of a single Picture Day, never to intersect again. 

There are two different ways this might be approached. One is to approach the story from an omniscient perspective and view the spread of the characters’ lives, both before and after Picture Day, in brief glimpses and vignettes. The other would be to keep all the action within the bounds of the single day, and leave the rest to the reader’s imagination. Either approach would be workable, I think.

**What it’s really about:** The diversity of human experience, as seen in microcosm.

**Pros:** Wouldn’t, I think, require a huge amount of research. Also, I’ve wanted to do “a comic about Picture Day” since my time in that job (nearly ten years ago now), so I’m unlikely to suddenly tire of it.

**Cons:** Extensive planning still needed. No plot, characters, or setting have been defined at all at this point. Setting might not be very interesting visually.

**Rethinking It:** A number of people have had an immediate and enthusiastic reaction to the idea of a school-picture-day comic when they first hear it, which says to me that it has a good deal of appeal and possibly relatability. But the concept as described I think is overindulgent. I think it would benefit from a narrowed scope, focusing primarily if not exclusively on a small group of photographers, and probably ditching the “showing the full span of characters’ lives” concept. There is more than enough space in the single day to capture sufficient nuance to be interesting. The rest is excess.



### Appendices

#### Aspects I want to explore in my thesis

- **Setting.** I want my work to convey a strong sense of place. Comics can depict settings with a high degree of specificity, but this potential isn’t often utilized as much as it could be. The places where we live are incredibly important to our lives, and I want them to be equally significant in my comics.
- **Humanism.** It is very important to me that my work facilitate empathy. It should reflect both the variety of human experience and the things we all share. The reader should relate to a character as to another person, and through the story feel that they have insight into another life.
- **Rendering.** I’m particularly interested in refining my line quality and black and white technique. 

#### Side projects

I’d like to take advantage of this time to try to work on some smaller projects as well, namely:

- **Daily sketchbook practice.** I’ve long wanted to establish this as a habit for myself and now seems like probably the best opportunity to be kept honest about such a thing.
- **Solo anthology magazine.** Originally planned as my mini-thesis but scrapped for Covid-related reasons, but I’m still hoping to produce the first issue of a solo comics magazine at some point. I finished one story for this over the summer and I have another one drafted and soon ready for final art. Some shorter features to round out the package would not be excessive. I’m so close. I’ve been saying I’m going to do this forever, so at some point I’ve got to.