---
listtitle: Rogue One
title: Rogue One is a beautiful disaster
subtitle: Ivy vs. Star Wars, part 3.5
description: A defense of a broken film
layout: post
order: 10
categories: [starwars]
---

I really like *Rogue One*. I\'m not going to deny that it\'s a mess in a
lot of ways. It has flaws. Big ones. But it also diverges from the rest
of the *Star Wars* series in a number of significant and interesting
ways, and in doing so becomes something unique. So I come before you
today to argue that *Rogue One* is, despite everything, not only a
decent film, but one of the best of its series.

First off, if you *must* write a prequel, I think this was a great
choice of subject. \"How did the rebels get the Death Star plans in the
first place?\" is a surprising premise, one that is instantly intriguing
yet somehow had never crossed my mind previously. And since no part of
that story had ever been fleshed out at all, this meant that new
characters could be produced for the occasion rather than rewriting the
histories of existing ones. It\'s rare to find a space for a prequel
that is this pristine, a perfect blank canvas to start with.
<!--more-->

So let\'s talk about the characters. I will grant that they are not
particularly well-developed. Jyn transitions a little too smoothly from
violent scofflaw to eloquent freedom fighter, and her exact motivations
are unclear to the end. Cassian likewise remains something of a black
box. And let\'s not even get into Saw Gerrara, who I think is meant to
come across as insane but instead only manages to be confusing and
inconsistent.

But I can\'t help but love these scrappy upstarts; *Star Wars* is
undoubtedly at its best when it\'s about gangs of misfits trying to do
their best. And I do like the characters, such as they are. K-2SO is the
rare genuinely likable new droid character, a sort of sardonic version
of C-3PO whose quips often sound like something out of Douglas Adams.
The Jedi Temple guys are always fun to watch. Riz Ahmed\'s natural
charisma makes his character shine despite the very little that we know
about him. Jyn, the haphazard construction of her personality aside, has
a balance of emotion and derring-do that\'s really quite excellent. And
Cassian, vaguely defined though he may be, embodies an interesting
aspect of the Rebellion that\'s rarely discussed in the other films.

To elaborate on that: One thing this series has never been particularly
good at is elucidating a) what the Empire does that is bad *in general*,
and b) what motivates someone to put their life on the line for the
Rebellion. A variety of evil deeds of the Empire have been shown on
screen before, of course, but when Luke Skywalker says he hates the
Empire, what exactly is he thinking of? What impact does the Empire have
on his life beyond the presence of a few too many Stormtroopers at Toshi
Station? *Rogue One*\'s answer to this question may seem obvious but
nevertheless hasn\'t really been covered extensively before:
imperialism. The planet of Jedha is depicted as one with a rich and
storied history, but the Empire, as empires often do, sees its rich
history as a natural resource to be plundered, and its people as utterly
disposable. It crushes the remnants of its local religion and loots the
temple of its valuables in order to produce the very weapon that it will
ultimately use to annihilate the entire city. An utterly familiar tale:
they came from far away and then they took until there was nothing left.
This is the atmosphere that breeds rebellion, and though we aren\'t
privy to the specifics, it\'s clear that this same thing went down on
whatever planet Cassian originally hailed from. These people became
rebels because they\'re ruined, angry, and eager for revenge and
restitution.

The way the film depicts its primary antagonist, Director Krennic, is
also interesting. Where the likes of Palpatine and Vader are monstrous
both in appearance and in deed, Krennic is a very average-looking
paper-pushing bureaucrat. His primary motivation is to hold on to
whatever trivial amount of clout he accrued for himself by his
involvement in the Death Star project. Rather than the overt horror of
lightning-hands, he embodies the \"banality of evil\", the mental state
where unfathomable wrongdoing becomes just another day at the office,
the moral implications of his actions neatly cordoned off so that they
won\'t trouble him in his free time. This is not the kind of thing one
expects from *Star Wars*.

The film also depicts the war itself somewhat differently than is usual
for the series. Yes, they do eventually capture the plans and win the
day, but at what cost? Literally every one of our protagonists dies,
along with unfathomable numbers of their compatriots. And the ultimate
outcome, we know from the other films, is that the rebels were able to
destroy one Death Star, after which the Empire just constructed another
one (presumably without the same vulnerability), and then created
Starkiller Base, an even more powerful variation on the same thing. In
the long run, all this bloodshed accomplishes virtually nothing. The
depiction of Scarif, where the film\'s final battles take place, is
clearly modeled after Vietnam War films, which American audiences
implicitly understand as a symbol of needless and bloody conflict. Like
most war movies, *Rogue One* still has its moments where war looks
pretty cool and exciting, but overall it definitely has a more anti-war
leaning than the series usually does.

Let\'s take a minute to talk about the film from a pure craft
standpoint, too. *Rogue One* is a phenomenally well-made film. The
visual direction is superb, and captured with impeccable and creative
cinematography. There are a lot of utterly brilliant shots to be found
here, both with and without characters, and the space sequences have
never looked better. In possibly my favorite shot of the entire *Star
Wars* oeuvre, a Star Destroyer slowly slides into view from complete
shadow, and just as the entire thing becomes visible, light starts to
creep in behind it to reveal that what appeared to be a starfield is in
fact the side of the Death Star. There\'s also Michael Giacchino\'s
excellent score, which manages to live up to the precedent set by John
Williams without just mindlessly recapitulating it. And let\'s not
ignore the daring, and I think very successful, decision to eschew the
traditional opening crawl and instead cut straight to a space scene with
a suitably dramatic chord.

But I would be remiss if I didn\'t mention a few of the film\'s faults
specifically. Most grievous, to me, is the unfathomably stupid decision
to resurrect Peter Cushing from the dead, which only succeeds in
demonstrating that our technology hasn\'t yet attained the ability to do
that successfully. It also strikes me as tasteless, an insult both to
the memory of Cushing and to the still-alive actors who could have taken
the role instead. Charles Dance? Jeremy Irons? Someone not famous who
would have been very good? The options are infinite, and all of them
better than I Can\'t Believe It\'s Not Peter Cushing. That they did this
at all sets a precedent that worries me greatly. I much prefer to see
iconic roles passed from actor to actor like precious heirlooms rather
than live in a world where fifty years from now we\'ll still see new
Indiana Jones flicks starring a CGI Harrison Ford.

Also, despite the obligatory internet whining about the female
protagonist, few of those people seem to have noticed that Jyn is the
*only* meaningful female character in the whole film. No room for
another girl in the ragtag band of ruffians, we\'ve already got one of
those. We don\'t even see any women as nameless combatants until the
film\'s final act, as if it had realized the problem only at the last
minute.

And then there\'s the octopus thing. Ah, the octopus thing. Why?

*Rogue One* can be a bit frustrating to watch, honestly, because a few
of its stumbles are so severe as to be cringeworthy. But to me, these
faults are hugely outweighed by its successes, and the ways in which it
sets itself apart from the rest of the series. It\'s not perfect, but
none of the other *Star Wars* films are, either. *Rogue One* is
ultimately interesting and fun to watch, and the same can\'t be said for
some of the others.

## Stray thoughts

- It might have been interesting if the film had used a
post-apocalyptic Naboo in place of Jedha as an illustration of the
Empire reducing a storied civilization to destitution. This would have
made the point even stronger, possibly, but Disney has thus far followed
an implicit We Don\'t Talk About The Prequels rule, and I can\'t say I
blame them. 

- That scene at the end with Darth Vader in the darkened
corridor. Dang it\'s good.
